Synagoga Tumbles, a Rider Triumphs: Clerical Viewers and the Fürstenportal of
Bamberg Cathedral
Author(s): Nina Rowe
Source: Gesta , 2006, Vol. 45, No. 1 (2006), pp. 15-42
Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of the International Center of
Medieval Art
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/25067124
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

The University of Chicago Press and International Center of Medieval Art are collaborating
with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Gesta

This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Synagoga Tumbles, a Rider Triumphs: Clerical Viewers
and the F?rstenportal of Bamberg Cathedral*
NINA ROWE
Fordham University

Abstract

Ecclesia and Synagoga?flank the ensemble, each installed
atop a column, beneath a baldachin. Ecclesia's column is

Paired female personifications of Church and Synagogue
had become an established subject for medieval art from as
early as the ninth century. But in the thirteenth century the
theme gained particular popularity, given pride of place in
decorative programs adorning the most ambitious cathedral
building projects of northern Europe. While the figures con
tinued to carry established meanings that manifested both the

ecclesiological notion of the harmony between the Old and
New Testaments and the triumph of Christianity over Judaism,

monumental, lifelike instantiations of the theme in the new
context of the cathedral facade invited interpretations in
relation to contemporary secular and sacred ideologies of
power. This article argues that in the eyes of Bamberg 's
clerics, ceremonial movement through the F?rstenportal of
Bamberg Cathedral activated new meanings for the Ecclesia
Synagoga motif, binding the figures to the Bamberg Rider
sculpture within the building. The bishops and chapter of
Bamberg were strong adherents of Emperor Frederick II,
whose policy and ideology hinged in part on notions of the
correct position of Jews in society. Viewed during a ritual en
trance to the cathedral, an aestheticized yet impotent figure
of Synagoga, along with the larger constellation of sculp
tures at the F?rstenportal, could project and reinscribe con
ceptions of Jews as fundamentally base, yet necessary, cogs
in the machinery of a divinely ordered society.

adorned with a seated figure and symbols of the evangelists;

Synagoga's features the Devil blinding a Jew.
This vision of cosmic adjudication and celestial order
was available to all members of Bamberg's urban community
and to visitors to the city, though it appears to have been
created primarily for the rarified audience of the bishop, his

household, the chapter, and guests of the episcopacy.2 In
the thirteenth century the episcopal precinct consisted of the
cathedral itself, the bishop's palace to the northwest, and the

canonical buildings and cloister attached to the cathedral's
south side (Fig. 4).3 It seems that the plaza that stretches
before the cathedral's north side today (bounded to the north

by one arm of the seventeenth-century Neue Residenz, now
the Staatsbibliothek) existed in a similar form in the thirteenth

century. This whole precinct apparently was enwalled, though
presumably still accessible to those who entered its eastern and

western gates. There were occasions when Bamberg's urban
population could have visited the cathedral hill and seen the
F?rstenportal. For example, when the bishop of Bamberg held
his court in the square at the north side of the cathedral, canons,
clerics from local collegiate churches, and, possibly, members
of the city's ministerial and burgher population could gaze at

the F?rstenportal and reflect on themes of justice and retri
bution.4 City dwellers could also pass the F?rstenportal if

On 6 May 1237 the city of Bamberg celebrated the con

they had business that brought them up from the mercantile

secration of its newly rebuilt cathedral. Perched high on a hill
at the center of town and punctuated by four imposing towers,

center in the valley below, to the collegiate church of Saint
Jacob or the monastery of Saint Michael, two foundations

the new structure loomed over the civic space in the valley
below (Fig. 1). Now known as the F?rstenportal, the chief

also on promontories beyond the cathedral hill. Such viewers
may have meditated on the virulent anti-Jewish polemic likely
preached by local Franciscans as they looked up at the sculpture
of Synagoga or the Devil blinding a Jew on the pillar beneath

ceremonial entry way at the building's north side was lavishly
adorned with sculptures (Figs. 2 and 3).1 Deeply carved figures
in dramatic poses inhabit its tympanum, offering a pantomime
performance of the separation of the saved and the damned at

her.5 The Jews of Bamberg who served ecclesiastical clients
through the money trades also would have seen the sculptures.

the Last Judgment. Wedged into the door jambs below, apostles
stand on the shoulders of prophets; both strain to look up and

Members of this audience perhaps scoffed at the cathedral's

catch a glimpse of the sacred drama in the tympanum. Hovering

on graven images while also viewing the portal's victimized

loose interpretation of the Second Commandment prohibition

at the base of the portal's left archivolts, a trumpeting angel

Jew and decrepit Synagoga with anxiety over the anti-Jewish

announces Christ's Second Coming, and a figure of Abraham
sits enthroned, cradling the souls of the saved. Two monu

violence the images might ignite.
The F?rstenportal did not, however, address itself pri

mental, freestanding female personifications of a triumphant

crowned Church and a blindfolded, wilting Synagogue?

marily to the laity. This ceremonial entrance was on the build

ing's north side, whereas it was the east end of the building

GESTA XLV/1 ? The International Center of Medieval Art 2006 15

This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

JL.

FIGURE 2. Bamberg Cathedral from the north (photo: Foto Marburg / Art

Resource, NY).

FIGURE 1. Bamberg Cathedral from the city center (photo: Foto Marburg /

Art Resource, NY).

A. Cathedral Hill

B. Eastern Gate to Cathedral Hill

C. Western Gate to Cathedral Hill //

D. Street of the Jews

E. Upper Parish Church
F. Franciscan Church ;
G. Collegiate Church of Saint Stephen
H. Abbey Church of Saint Michael
I. Collegiate Church of Saint Jacob
J. Regnitz River

W.-?..?r-,-:'J^-?l

X>^>-ft&2$

FIGURE 3. F?rstenportal. North facade, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: Foto
Marburg /Art Resource, NY).

FIGURE 4. Plan of Bamberg 's cathedral hill and western portion of the city
(by the author with assistance from Wes Evard, 2006, after Schimmelpfennig).

16
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

explain the paired personifications of Church and Synagogue
as a pictorial means to convey either the theological notion
of the harmony between the Old and New Testaments or the
triumph of Christianity over Judaism. These iconographie
studies are useful because they analyze a range of instances
of the theme of Ecclesia and Synagoga across multiple media
throughout the Middle Ages and amass a body of related
theological texts. But this literature suffers from some of the
shortcomings endemic to iconographie analysis in general.13
Tracking gestures, attributes, and only occasionally the visual
contexts of the figures, questions regarding scale, style, pa
tronage, and particularly viewership tend to be unexplored.14
Studies of Bamberg Cathedral, for their part, typify long
standing trends in the field of medieval art history. Previous
analyses of the building's architecture were largely concerned
with chronology and style, mentioning the sculpture only in
passing.15 Discussions of the sculpture emphasized connois
seurship, distinguishing between multiple hands who worked
at the site.16 Particular attention was paid to differentiating pro
duction of the "older" workshop, responsible for the reliefs at

the interior eastern choir (Georgenchor) and the northeast
FIGURE 5. Bamberg Rider installed on northern pier, east end, Bamberg Ca
thedral (photo: Foto Marburg /Art Resource, NY).

that greeted visitors who walked up the cathedral hill.6 Schol

ars posit that the south portal of the building's eastern face
(known as the Adamspforte) was created especially as a site

portal (Gnadenpforte), from that of the "younger" workshop
that came to Bamberg around the 1220s, perhaps after having

been at the Reims work site, to complete the F?rstenportal
and other figures.17 In an important recent article, Robert
Suckale assesses the production at the Bamberg work site,
demonstrating that the sculptures were created to be seen
from multiple vantage points and calling for further analysis

for lay penitential rituals and to serve as an entrance for pil

of the way the works address viewers.18 Suckale's insights,

grims traveling to Bamberg to honor its recently canonized
founders Emperor Henry II and Empress Kunigunde.7 The

along with other recent studies that consider the political and

citizens of Bamberg seem to have visited the cathedral only on
high feast days and relied for spiritual needs such as baptisms,
marriages, and death services on their parish churches.8

ship, are departure points for the present study.19
In this article, I seek to reconstruct the viewing experience
of the elite group of clerics who were permitted to walk through
the F?rstenportal into the cathedral and proceed to their desig
nated seats at the building's high choir, the western Peterschor.

The clerics of the cathedral and their select guests were
the principal audience for Bamberg's ceremonial entrance, and,

it seems, the only audience permitted to walk through the
F?rstenportal and, as a result, experience its exterior program
in conjunction with the cathedral's interior decor. Only they

would see that the portal program is complemented, indeed
completed, by the equestrian sculpture known as the Bamberg
Rider affixed to a pier at the eastern end of the cathedral di

social as well as the scopic contingencies of medieval viewer

Borrowing a term from reception theory, I consider these
clerics and their adherents as a principal "interpretive com
munity" for the decorative complex.20 That is, in the high
Middle Ages, monumental visual programs often were created
to appeal to a variety of audiences, with a range of experience

with and investment in the theological and ecclesiological

rectly inside the ceremonial entryway (Fig. 5). During cere
monial processions at the cathedral hill, the Bamberg Rider

abstractions that drove iconographies. Collective identities of

ing and to introduce them to the sacred order represented
within.9 The Bamberg Rider, a representative of earthly
authority, gained meaning in relation to the figures on the
portal exterior?the scene of the Last Judgment and the per

experience. At Bamberg, the local Jewish community, the city's
burghers, pilgrims honoring the cults of SS. Henry and Kuni
gunde, among others, each constituted a separate interpretive
community, distinct from that of the cathedral's clerics. Sensi
tivity to the varied worldviews informing reception in general

larly, because of their juxtaposition with the Rider, Ecclesia

Earlier scholarship on the Ecclesia-Synagoga motif

can help scholars analyze systematically the multivalence of
premodern decorative programs.
In the discussion that follows, I consider the political,

ignored its political significances.12 Key surveys on the theme

theological, and social conditions that constituted the Bamberg

served to draw members of the clerical retinue into the build

sonifications of the Church and the Jewish tradition.10 Simi

and Synagoga invite emphatically political interpretations.11

such groups often crystallized around a shared "horizon of
expectations," forged by social, intellectual, and corporate

17
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

clerics' horizon of expectations as they viewed the F?rsten
portal. These expectations were driven by historical circum
stances and the ideological commitments of the clerics'
overlord, Bishop Ekbert von Andechs-Meran (1203-1237).

An Episcopal Agenda

Bishop Ekbert ruled during much of the time that the cathedral

century their city had been transformed from a cultural back
water and a site of fluctuating political fortunes to a center of
power within the empire. Located in Franconia, in the northern
part of the modern state of Bavaria, Bamberg was established
in 1007 by Emperor Henry II, who founded the city as seat of

building project was under way. He was the magnate under
whom the F?rstenportal was created and the leader whose po
litical alliance to Emperor Frederick II shaped the cathedral's

decorative program.
Ekbert's clerics certainly may have deviated from the
bishop's official positions and likely oversaw much of the
cathedral's construction. Indeed, Bishop Ekbert was away
from Bamberg on the day of the ceremonial consecration of
the cathedral in 1237. He was in Austria, fighting on behalf
of his imperial overlord. Ekbert died within a month of the
cathedral's dedication, never having returned to Bamberg to
see the building project completed. Ekbert's successor, his
uncle, Poppo von Andechs-Meran (provost 1206-1237; bishop
1237-1242), was the first Bamberg bishop to enjoy full use of
the F?rstenportal, and the clerics under Poppo's leadership were

the ones who experienced the site as an integrated image en
vironment. But the early reign of Bishop Poppo is marked
by continuities with rather than breaks from the previous
regime. Poppo had been the provost of the cathedral through
out Ekbert's reign, and when he became bishop he continued
his nephew's political affiliation with the Hohenstaufen.21 The
cathedral clerics, for their part, at times disagreed with Ekbert,
but it was only after the era of Ekbert and Poppo, in the late
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, that the Bamberg chapter

On the day of the cathedral consecration in 1237, Bam
berg's canons had much to celebrate. Over the previous half

a new bishopric and as putative administrative and spiritual
center for his rule.27 Following Carolingian and Ottoman pre

cedents at cities such as Aachen and Magdeburg, Henry II en
dowed Bamberg with extensive holdings, showered the new
see with luxury manuscripts and liturgical objects, and ordered
the construction of a lavish cathedral.28 Throughout Henry IF s

reign Bamberg hosted multiple secular and ecclesiastical cele
brations and was a favored visiting spot for the itinerant im

perial court. But following Henry's death in 1024, imperial
interest in Bamberg dwindled. For close to a century and a half

the city strengthened its religious hold over the region and
flourished economically, but in this era, the bishops of Bam
berg had only weak ties to the empire, and the city rarely was
visited by the imperial retinue.

With the episcopal election of Otto II von Andechs
Meran (1177-1196), however, Bamberg's period of insularity
ended. Otto II was one of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa's
closest ecclesiastical allies and was deeply involved in im
perial politics in the 1180s and 1190s. Otto IFs great-nephew
Ekbert von Andechs-Meran enhanced Bamberg's transregional

forcefully asserted its independence from the bishop.22 If
clerics at Bamberg periodically resented or even renounced

?lan further. As spiritual and temporal lord, Bishop Ekbert
aggressively sought to restore his see to the transregional

the absolute authority of their episcopal overlord, by dint of
their office they still were immersed in the historical circum

status it had enjoyed at its founding. As a member of one of
the most powerful noble lines in Germany, Ekbert was able to
cement new connections between Bamberg and power centers
across northern Europe.29 His siblings were among the stron

stances and versed in the prevailing imperial ideologies that
officially informed clerical production and reception of the
F?rstenportal.
Recovery of the original sensory effects of the works at

gest ecclesiastical and secular princes of the empire, and his

Bamberg is a challenge. In the nineteenth century, the poly
chromy was stripped off the sculptures and the walls at

family administered territories throughout Franconia, Bavaria,
the Tyrol, and Carniola. Moreover, thanks to the shrewd diplo
macy of his family, Ekbert was brother-in-law to King Philip

Bamberg Cathedral.23 In 1936 the building underwent further

Augustus of France and King Andrew of Hungary.

transformation when the sculptures of Ecclesia, Synagoga,
the trumpeting angel, and Abraham were removed from their

In 1208 Ekbert sought to augment further the prestige of
his line, himself, and his see by brokering the marriage of his

original posts on the F?rstenportal exterior.24 Currently they

are installed at the east end of the cathedral's interior south

brother to the niece of the German king, Philip of Swabia
(1198-1208). Ekbert arranged to have the wedding held at

aisle, perched on raised plinths that approximate the height of

Bamberg, and dignitaries from across the German territories

the original columns on which the figures stood.25 Because
visuality is contingent, no twenty-first-century scholar can

traveled to the city to honor the union. But while Ekbert
expected the nuptial festivities to win him honor, they only
brought disgrace.30 On the wedding day, after presiding over
the exchange of vows, King Philip retired to the bishop's
palace, where he was assassinated by Otto von Wittelsbach,
palatine count of Bavaria.
Bishop Ekbert, his brother Henry of Istria, and the epis
copal ministeriales were implicated in the murder, for it was

fully re-create a thirteenth-century imagistic encounter.26 But

it is worth trying to estimate the original scopic experience of

Ecclesia and Synagoga in relation to their decorative en
vironment, because it will lead to a better understanding of
medieval uses of the notion of the Jew and of the coercive
power of lifelike style and aestheticization.

18
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

copy of Henry's cathedral, with choirs at the east and west
ends.35 New evidence analyzed by Achim Hubel and Manfred
Schuller suggests that the eastern choir was rebuilt by about

1201, and, following a break in construction about 1210, the
eastern part of the cathedral's north aisle and the F?rstenportal

were complete by 1225.36 Construction of the western portion
of the building was interrupted by another fire about 1227 but

was complete by the time of the consecration in 1237.37
The sculpture adorning Bamberg Cathedral was created
by two teams of sculptors. The first team carved the interior

relief sculptures located on the north and south sides of the
Georgenchor at the cathedral's east end and the sculpture at
the northeastern Gnadenpforte (Fig. 6). They then crafted most
of the jamb figures at the F?rstenportal. Midway through the
FIGURE 6. Virgin and Child with SS. Henry, Kunigunde, George, Peter, and
ecclesiastical figures, Gnadenpforte, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: author).

apparent that without the assistance of an intimate who knew

the intricacies of the episcopal palace and the precise where
abouts of the king during his stay at Bamberg, Otto von
Wittelsbach could not have carried out his attack. However,
contemporary sources contradict one another over the degree

of Ekbert's involvement. Some suggest that the bishop lured
Philip into the designated spot of the murder or helped Otto
von Wittelsbach escape. Others say only that the bishop's
men took part in the bloody assault, though one source even
doubts Ekbert's participation altogether.31 Recent scholarship
concludes that the bishop did conspire in the murderous plot,
welcoming the assassination of Philip, because the king re
fused to renounce his claims to fiefs included within Bamberg's
holdings.32 Whatever the actual extent of their involvement,

the bishop and Henry of Istria aroused suspicions because
they fled Bamberg for the safety of the Hungarian royal court,

where their sister Gertrud was queen.33 At an imperial diet of

November 1208, when Otto of Brunswick was elected king
of Germany, the princes of the realm ruled that Ekbert should
be tried without an investigation. Shortly thereafter the bishop

was condemned and given the same harsh sentence as the
known murderer, Otto von Wittelsbach. Bishop Ekbert lost

project, a new team of sculptors came to the Bamberg work
site, introducing a sculptural style associated with Reims.38
Scholars disagree over the precise dating of the arrival of this
"younger" workshop. While some have argued that they came
to Bamberg as late as 1235, recent archaeological and historical

evidence suggests they may have arrived in the 1220s.39 The
"younger" workshop carved most of the F?rstenportal tym
panum, some of the right jamb figures, Ecclesia, Synagoga,
and the Bamberg Rider. The team also created the sculptures
that now adorn the southeastern Adamspforte, the freestand
ing works now installed around the Georgenchor inside the
cathedral, and the tomb of Pope Clement II in the west choir.40

Work on the bishop's ceremonial entrance, the F?rsten
portal, was under way during the years that Ekbert sought to
restore respect for himself and his see through adherence to

his imperial overlord. Following Philip of Swabia's murder,
Otto of Brunswick secured the German crown, but had a ten
tative hold on it. Staufen adherents recovered power quickly
and elected Frederick II as their new ruler. Bishop Ekbert
supported Frederick II, attending Frederick IF s coronation
in Aachen in 1215 and becoming one of the first to take up
the cross when Frederick called for a new crusade.41 While
Frederick delayed his campaign to the east until 1228, Bishop
Ekbert fulfilled his vow right away, departing with the first
contingent of the Fifth Crusade in a public display of penitence
and of support for his Staufen overlord.42 Ekbert's time as a

all his fiefs and taxation authority over his allodial lands, his
title was revoked, and the Bamberg chapter was put under the

crusader, though, was brief, and by May 1218 the bishop was
back in Bamberg.43 Meanwhile, up on the Bamberg Cathedral
hill, work continued apace. There had been a break in the build

administration of King Otto IV For more than three years

ing project, presumably because of Ekbert's outlaw status and

Ekbert remained in exile. But eventually he forged an alliance

the seizure of episcopal lands and revenues between 1208 and
1211. Within years of his reinstatement, though, work seems

with Pope Innocent III, and in 1211 he was acquitted and re
stored to office.34

Once Ekbert was reinstalled as bishop, he used the

to have picked up again, so that by the time the bishop returned

had been damaged by successive fires in the twelfth century.

from crusade, much of the eastern end of the building was
complete. In the years between 1218 and 1223, Ekbert stayed
close to home, leaving the city only to go as far away as
the Rhineland.44 Presumably in these years he invited the

After a particularly large conflagration in 1185, a rebuilding
campaign advanced in fits and starts to create an enlarged

"younger" sculptural team to Bamberg, and they set to work
on the figures outside and inside the F?rstenportal.

cathedral as a monument to assert his recovered authority.
The cathedral constructed at the order of Emperor Henry II

19
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

FIGURE 8. Bust of Ecclesia, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: Foto Marburg /
Art Resource, NY).

sonal investment in the building and its construction.47 The
FIGURE 7. Ecclesia, F?rstenportal (formerly), Bamberg Cathedral (photo:
Foto Marburg /Art Resource, NY).

altar was designated to the memory of a certain Wortwinus,
apparently the deceased master of the building workshop. There

must have been some dispute concerning who had authority
to use the site, because a document of 1231 insists that it was
In 1225 Ekbert struck a deal that both cemented his ties

Bishop Ekbert alone?neither the provost, nor the deacon, nor

to the imperial crown and ensured the continued progress of

any other clerics?who could act as priest at this altar.48

concerning some contested fiefs, Emperor Frederick II granted
Ekbert four thousand silver marks.45 Most of the money likely

cathedral building project and for bringing sculptors to the

went toward the cathedral building project, which by this
time was half complete. While it may be too much to say
that the settlement resulted in Frederick II's direct support

For in the final years of the construction of Bamberg Cathe
dral, the bishop was more caught up in cementing his per
sonal relation with Emperor Frederick than with the mortar
and masonry of the cathedral going up in his city. In 1225
Ekbert spent roughly six full months in Frederick II's king
dom of Sicily, serving as ambassador on imperial missions.49

the cathedral's construction. Under the terms of a contract

for Bamberg's new cathedral, it was the only church north of
the Alps built thanks to an influx of cash from the emperor's

fiscum.46 At the very least, Ekbert's settlement with Fred
erick II demonstrates that by the mid-1220s Ekbert could
claim a particularly close relationship to the emperor, and the

If Bishop Ekbert were responsible for reinvigorating the
site, it was up to the chapter to oversee the building's progress.

When Pope Gregory IX excommunicated Frederick II in
September 1227 for having delayed too long the fulfillment

cathedral could serve as a monument to the restoration of

of his crusading vow, Ekbert was there to garner allies for the

Bishop Ekbert's status within the imperial realm. Evidence

imperial cause. The bishop toured the Italian lands with the
imperial retinue repeatedly in the early 1230s. Later in that
decade, the emperor rewarded Ekbert with the governorship

concerning an altar in the southern arm of the west crossing,

dedicated to the Virgin in 1229, demonstrates Ekbert's per

20
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

FIGURE 10. Bust of Synagoga, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: Foto Marburg /
Art Resource, NY).

FIGURE 9. Synagoga, F?rstenportal (formerly), Bamberg Cathedral
(photo: Foto Marburg /Art Resource, NY).

door presumably reflected cathedral hierarchy, beginning with
the bishop, and provost, followed by twenty cathedral canons,

fourteen canons-in-training (Kapitelsanw?rter), multiple vic
ars, and students at the cathedral school (scholares), a group
of which likely functioned as chanters (chorales). In addition,

of Austria because the bishop had led a campaign against his
own kinsman (Duke Frederick II the Quarrelsome) who had
shirked imperial authority.50 Bishop Ekbert also orchestrated
the marriage of Frederick's son Henry (VII) and then, when the

rebellious Henry was deposed in 1235, Ekbert, along with
the bishop of Salzburg, was appointed to escort Henry over the

Alps to Aquileia.51 Meanwhile, back in Bamberg, the chapter
under the leadership of Provost Poppo from the mid-1220s
oversaw the cathedral's completion in time for its consecra
tion on the 225th anniversary of the dedication of Henry II's

original foundation.52

Representing the Ideal

Once the new Bamberg Cathedral was complete, the
F?rstenportal served as the centerpiece in the performance of
ecclesiastical power.53 The order of processions entering this

on many occasions leaders of Bamberg's three collegiate
churches, Saint Stephen, Saint Gangolf, and Saint Jacob, par
ticipated in cathedral rituals.54 These were the ecclesiastical
elites of the city who, along with special guests of the bishop,
had access to the dynamic scopic experience shaped by the
sculptures both outside and inside the F?rstenportal.
When the clerics of Bamberg looked up at the F?rsten
portal, they encountered an ecclesiological visualization of
three eras of human history: the age of the law, the age of
grace, and the end of time foretold in Revelation. Synagoga
represents the age of the old law (Figs. 9 and 10). She is a queen
who once ruled the earth, but now her time has passed. Bearing
a broken staff, she sways and drops her Mosaic tablets. Her
blindfold marks her as misguided and unable to see the truth
of Jesus' status as messiah. Ecclesia, in contrast, stands as
steadfast ruler in the age of grace (Figs. 7 and 8). Her mantle
and crown attest to the legitimacy of her rule while her chalice

21
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

?^mtmm'mmmim^

rt Aja

FIGURE 13. Last Judgment, tympanum, F?rstenportal, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: author).

FIGURE 11. Apostles standing on the shoulders of prophets, left jambs,
F?rstenportal, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: author).

FIGURE 12. Apostles standing on the shoulders of prophets, right jambs,
F?rstenportal, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: author).

and labarum (now destroyed) herald the sacraments and the
Church's strength.55 The prophets and apostles of the jambs

Synagoga and Ecclesia. The Last Judgment scene in the tym
panum (Fig. 13) visualizes the opening of the final era of his

(Figs. 11 and 12), the former representing the age of the Old
Testament, the latter the age of the New, are counterparts to

tory, when Christ will separate the saved from the damned,
preparing the way for the descent of the Heavenly Jerusalem

22
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

to earth. Off to the left, a trumpeting angel announces Christ's
return, as Abraham rocks the souls of the saved (for overall

view, see Fig. 3). The constellation of figures on the F?rsten
portal diagrams the key tenets of the Christian notion of his

torical progression.
Visual qualities of the works drew the ensemble out of
the realm of theology into the realms of politics and social
life. When the "younger" workshop came to Bamberg, they
created works in a new, dramatic, and lifelike style.56 Various
factors contributed to the early-thirteenth-century experiments
with naturalism, pioneered by workshops in northern France?

a new emphasis on Christ's humanity following the Fourth
Lateran Council, theological speculation on the status of the
natural world, scientific inquiry into the physiology of vision

and the theory of intromission, among others. Though it is
impossible to know the reasons for the arrival of the "younger"
team to Bamberg, as mentioned above, the archaeological and
historical evidence suggests that Ekbert and his clerics invited
the workshop to their city in the 1220s. It is easy to imagine

that the Bamberg magnates were aware of contemporary ex
periments with naturalism being worked out by sculptors in
northern France and were eager to bring to their cathedral
sculptors working in the most fashionable, innovative styles.
The techniques of the "younger" Bamberg workshop may
have engendered different responses than some of the produc
tions of the "older" team.57 For example, the blocky, hieratic
figures of the Virgin and Child with saints on the Gnadenpforte
seem to inhabit a remote realm when compared to the dramatic
naturalism of Synagoga or the Bamberg Rider (compare Figs.

6, 9, and 14). In the sculptures by the "younger" workshop,
bodies are anatomically coherent, gravity appears to pull on
drapery, facial expression and gesture suggest human emotion.

These stylistic qualities were amplified through coloration.
New research by Walter Hartleitner suggests that the F?rsten
portal tympanum scene was painted in a single pink tone.58 The

Ecclesia and Synagoga figures, however, were vividly poly
chromed. Ecclesia's robe seems to have been ocher-colored,
her crown was gold, and her hair was reddish brown.59 Syna
goga's robe also likely was painted ocher, her blindfold black,
and the clasp on her dress gold. The jamb sculptures may have

been adorned with color, and the pupils of their eyes appear
to have been painted black.60 The Bamberg Rider discussed
more fully below was painted in similar tones.
Just as medieval theologians read scripture on multiple
levels?the literal, the symbolic, the moral, and the anagogic?
so too medieval viewers recognized images on cathedrals to be
polysemous.61 Thus it was possible for medieval monumental
art to be understood by its original audiences as both convey
ing enduring tenets of dogma and inviting interpretation in
relation to more immediate temporal concerns. I believe that
at Bamberg and other early-thirteenth-century centers, dramatic

and lifelike style combined with polychromy enhanced this
phenomenon by visually referring to the corporeal world while

at the same time projecting a transcendent ideal. The sculp

FIGURE 14. Bamberg Rider. Interior, east end of Bamberg Cathedral
(photo: Foto Marburg /Art Resource, NY).

tures of Ecclesia and Synagoga at Bamberg in particular con
tinued to convey their long-standing significances, acting as

a pictorial manifestation of the ecclesiological notion of the

harmony between the Old and New Testaments and the
epochal shift that came with Christ's Incarnation and death.
Made manifest in the forms and colors of the tangible world,
these figures invited clerics to understand sculptural fabrica
tions as embodiments of a divinely sanctioned reality. Recent
scholarship recognizes that mimesis can draw attention to the

artificial nature of images themselves and relies on a cooper
ative audience, invested in reading ideological projections as
truths.62 The same can be said for the new style introduced at

Bamberg as seen through the eyes of cathedral clerics. The
relevant ideological projections at Bamberg orbited around
ideals and realities concerning Jews.

23
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Before the Law

Lauda and Tauberbischofsheim (both in Baden), and at Fulda

As the ecclesiastics of Bamberg proceeded toward the
F?rstenportal, the figures of Ecclesia and Synagoga enframing
a scene of judgment invited reflection on thirteenth-century

imperial concerns about keeping earthly forces in balance.
Medieval rulers were conceived of as vicars of Christ, mini
mizing disorder in the terrestrial realm so that it could as
closely as possible mirror the celestial City of God, in the terms

articulated by Augustine.63 In the twelfth and thirteenth cen

turies there was a new emphasis on the authority of the law

within political theology. In his Policraticus (1159), for
example, John of Salisbury deems the ruler an "Image of Jus

tice," both a quasi-divine being who was above the law and
a keeper of the laws that order society on a celestial model.64

Bishop Ekbert's ally Emperor Frederick II advanced such
formulations, casting himself as law incarnate (lex animata)
and instituting successive new legal codes with the intent to
reform society and keep control over his vast realm, which in
cluded the kingdoms of Germany and Sicily as well as lands

(in Hessen).72 Circumstances seem to have been similar at all
these sites, though we have the most vivid account of the ep

isode at Fulda, where the charred bodies of a miller and his

five sons were discovered in an incinerated mill outside
town.73 In this infamous instance of the blood libel, locals
accused their Jewish neighbors of murder and arson and
launched a riot during which thirty-four Jews were slaugh
tered. One account reports that, under torture, some Jews
admitted to killing the Christian boys in order to draw blood
for ritual use.

The violence of the mid-1230s came to a halt when the
emperor intervened. Following the attacks in Fulda, after both
Jewish and Christian plaintiffs had come before the emperor

at the imperial residence at Hagenau in Alsace, Frederick II
launched an investigation into the accusations against the
Fulda Jews.74 Once he found the charges to be false, the em
peror instituted his Privilege and Judgment in Favor of the
Jews (Privilegium et sententia in favor em ludaeorum) of 1236
to protect Jews against further accusations and assaults.75 The

ruling denounced and outlawed the blood libel and attacks

in northern Italy.65

Within these codes, Frederick's regulation of Jews mani

against Jewish body and property on the grounds of such false

fested in microcosm his larger drive to bring divine order to

accusations.

the quotidian realm. In two legal proclamations instituted in
the Sicilian kingdom, the emperor strove to keep both anti

erick II came to the throne, it was customary for emperors to

Jewish violence and Jews themselves in check. In the Assizes

of Messina (1221), Frederick stipulated that Jews bear an
outward marker of their non-Christian status (probably a sky
blue garment or patch), and Jewish men were to grow their
beards.66 The aim of this ruling was to protect Christians
from inadvertent sexual contact with "nonbelievers," as pre
scribed in the canons of the Fourth Lateran Council (1215).67
Later, in the Constitutions of Melfi, also known as the Liber

augustalis (1231), Frederick reviled blasphemers, heretics,
rapists, and murderers, but Jews were not included among

But with protection came submission. By the time Fred
claim Jews to be their special property. His grandfather Fred
erick I Barbarossa had instituted one charter that proclaimed
imperial authority in all matters pertaining to Jewish life and

customs (1157) and in a second charter (1179) deemed Jews
members of the imperial treasury (adfiscum imperatoris per
tinent), that is, special protectees but implicitly special property
as well.76 Frederick IF s 1236 privilege contained language en
hancing the notion that the Jews of the empire were directly
servile to the emperor and none other, calling Jews servi comer?

nostre (or Kammerknechte).11 Scholars have debated the sig

the condemned groups. Moreover, here the emperor failed to

nificance of the term servi within the context of this and other

reiterate earlier promulgations regarding distinctive dress for
Jews.68 Indeed, the constitutions outlawed attacks based solely

German charters concerning Jews.78 Some maintain that it

on religious grounds against Jews as well as Muslims.69 The
evidence of this legal code, other imperial policies, and the

Jews were considered "serfs" or "servants" of the royal
chamber, though those terms themselves are vague. For the
purposes of the present argument, the significance of this
ruling is that, though Jews were not literal servants of any

presence of learned Jews at Frederick IF s court have led some
scholars to categorize the emperor as unusually Jew-friendly,

an enlightened liberal avant la lettre.70 But recent reassess
ment makes plain that Frederick's policies on Jews were pri
marily informed by commercial and practical concerns.71 Chief

among the latter was the drive to keep order across the ex
panse of the imperial realm.
Within the German kingdom, Frederick also proscribed
anti-Jewish violence as a means of instituting peace. Waves

suggests that Jews held the status of slaves. Others argue that

imperial court, conceptually Frederick's 1236 privilege
underscored a notion long prevailing in theology?that in the
Christian world order, Jews were inferior beings to be kept
under Christian watch.79
From the time of the early Church, theologians had con
ceived of Jews as crippled by their rejection of Christ and en
slaved within the Christian realm.80 Paul explained the story

of attacks on Jews erupted periodically throughout the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries in the German territories. A series of

of the twins Jacob and Esau (Gen. 25:21-34) as an allegory
of the relation of the Church to the elder Synagogue. Born

massacres across the German kingdom from the winter of
1235 to the winter of 1236 is particularly well documented.
In this year mobs attacked Jews at Wolfhagen (near Kassel),

first, Esau held the family birthright but, scorning his divinely

granted preeminence, sold this right to his brother. For Paul,
prophecy put forth in Genesis was fulfilled in the split of the

24
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Church from the Synagogue: "the elder shall serve the younger"
(Rom. 9:12). Augustine and other church fathers elaborated on
what they held to be divine endorsement of Jewish submission:

drapery of her robe, she is a figure off balance, swaying and
threatening to topple over. Synagoga carries a broken staff,

just as later in the Genesis tale Jacob gains his father's bless
ing and Esau is made to serve, so too is Christ "lord over his

from her hand, sliding down her left leg, ready to crash to the
ground. The tumbling plaques even appear to be an attenuated

brethren, since his people have dominion over the Jews."81
Theologians of the high Middle Ages continued to propagate

plifying her feebleness. Robbed of her crown and blindfolded,

that such submission of God's original "chosen" was now part
of the Lord's plan. With his promulgation of 1236, Frederick II
exploited a patently theological conception to justify a policy
aimed at keeping the Jews of the German kingdom protected

Synagoga can neither lead nor protect. But Synagoga is also
aestheticized.85 She embodies the ideals for female beauty
codified in representations of the Virgin, female saints, and
even Ecclesia. Synagoga's beauty marks her as consummate
insider within the Christian world order projected on the

Scholars of history and religion have shown that con
ceptualizations debasing, yet protecting, Jews and Judaism

counterdistinction to contemporaneous images of male Jews,
such as those elsewhere at Bamberg Cathedral and in contem

were crucial to Christian articulations of political and spiritual
authority in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. In his land

porary manuscripts (discussed below). A feminized, aestheti

the notion of Jewish servitude and went further to maintain

but also servile.

and the tablets of the law that once lent her authority slip

appendage, elongating Synagoga's limp left arm, hence am

cathedral facade. This use of the female form stands in

cized figuration of Jewish history projects an ideal of Jewish
mark studies, R. I. Moore demonstrates how European secular
inclusion against a reality of Jewish debasement. Like the
and ecclesiastical rulers in this period sought to establish hege
Jews of the empire, Synagoga is a constitutive member of a
mony by identifying and constraining those deemed alien to divinely ordered society. But also like her real-world Jewish
the Christian community, particularly targeting Jews.82 But
counterparts, in the Christian understanding, Synagoga's
while Jews were condemned for blindly rejecting Jesus' status
inability to recognize Jesus as messiah marks her as feeble
as messiah and for orchestrating his murder, theologians de
dependent.
fended the persistence of Jews within Christian society.
As the Bamberg clerics moved toward the portal, the Last
Pauline pronouncements, further developed by Augustine,
Judgment tympanum came into view (see Fig. 13). At the
insisted on the preservation of Jews: Jews were the Lord's
central axis of the scene Christ sits enthroned as judge and
original "chosen," as such they attested to the validity of the
Man of Sorrows. To Christ's right, the saved and heavenly
Old Testament and further, at the end of time (so went the attendants, in orderly rows, glide toward the savior. A cluster
hope) they would be converted to Christianity.83 In the high
of angels bears the instruments of Christ's Passion, and one
medieval drive to consolidate temporal and sacred authority,
celestial agent takes a smiling monarch by the hand, leading
Jews were a conveniently built-in population of "outsiders," him toward the Lord: the king who rules the earth following
a community and a tradition against which Christianity could
Christ's precepts will enjoy his eternal reward. On Christ's
left, the disorder of damnation is materialized. Bodies twist
be defined. Frederick IF s policy typified official attitudes
toward and uses of Jews in the thirteenth century. The popu
and gesticulate wildly. A satanic beast with the face of an
lation was defended and thus preserved, yet kept in its place.
animal and the body of a man grasps a bejeweled chain that
Up on the Bamberg Cathedral facade, a comely person
ensnares the transgressors of divine law, a coterie that includes
ification of Jewish history and religion appeared bound and a king, an ecclesiastic, and a grinning man with a sack of
weakened?included within the sacred order, yet impotent money, suggesting the greed associated with usury.86 Beneath
within it. From the plaza to the north of the cathedral, Bam
Christ's feet are two supplicant figures of the Virgin and John
berg's ecclesiastical retinue would have looked up and en
the Baptist. The Bamberg clerics turned their heads to look up
countered the entirety of the F?rstenportal exterior. From this

at the tympanum in a manner similar to the representations of

vantage point, Ecclesia and Synagoga, each slightly over

prophets and apostles wedged into the portal jambs, though
some of these sculpted figures turn away from the scene of
judgment and thus engaged their clerical viewers head-on

lifesize (1.88 m including base), dwarf the other figures around

the portal and originally would have commanded attention
through their vivid polychromy.84 As the episcopal procession

moved closer and as its members viewed the sculptures head
on, Church and Synagogue offered a striking visualization
of the opposition between physical strength and weakness.
Ecclesia, ensconced in the fabric of her mantle, with crown
firmly on her head, gazes outward, forthrightly. Originally
bearing a chalice and battle standard, Ecclesia invites onlookers

to join the community of the saved, assuring them that she
has the strength to protect her flock. Synagoga hardly presents
a formidable alternative. Her legs restrained by the diaphanous

(see Figs. 11, 12, and 15). Old Testament seers, the first Chris
tian acolytes, and contemporary ecclesiastical authorities alike
all participated in an intervisual play, looking up at the spec

tacle of deific adjudication and looking out at one another.
Clerics became witnesses to and participants within sacred
history, as the scene of divine justice in the F?rstenportal
tympanum invited meditation on the current temporal order.
Emperor Frederick IPs supporters hailed him as lex animata,
the ruler who embodies and brings to earth divine order, the
ruler who judges with divine approbation. Those who abide

25
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

^1

s Kl
m

0

FIGURE 16. Devil blinding a Jew (column beneath Synagoga, F?rstenpor
tal, Bamberg Cathedral) (photo: author).

FIGURE 15. Apostles and prophets looking up and out, right jambs of
F?rstenportal, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: author).

by Frederick's laws participate in the maintenance of earthly

harmony. They will enjoy the rewards of the saved. Those
who transgress his laws, who threaten the peace by spreading
calumny and igniting riots, will forever be enchained by Satan.
Once the clerics of Bamberg reached the threshold of the
cathedral, further images cued them to reflect on the position

of Jews within sacred and civil society. To the right of the
F?rstenportal, on the pillar beneath Synagoga, is the figure of

a Devil blinding a Jew, identified by standardized iconog
raphy?beard and pointed hat (Figs. 16 and 17).87 Scholars
have observed that this figure, more directly than Synagoga,

refers to actual living Jewish populations.88 And Bamberg's
population of Jews resided close at hand, concentrated in a
street at the foot of the cathedral hill in the southern portion of

the urban center (Figs. 4 and 18).89 Jews had been in Bamberg
at least since the final years of the eleventh century.90 At this
time Pope Clement III wrote to the Bamberg bishop telling him

FIGURE 17. Devil blinding a Jew (column beneath Synagoga, F?rstenpor
tal, Bamberg Cathedral). Photo taken from steps of F?rstenportal (photo:

author).

26
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

to be on the lookout for Jews who had converted to Chris
tianity but were lapsing into their old traditions.91 A Jewish
population in the city is also attested by Benjamin of Tudela's

late-twelfth-century account (1160-1173),92 and the less re
liable Miracula Cunegundis (1199-1200) tells of a Jewish con
version before the relics of Empress Kunigunde.93 In the early
thirteenth century the Jewish street appears to have accom

modated a synagogue, a school, and perhaps a bathhouse and

a dance hall.94 In the same era a local rabbi, Samuel ben

Baruch, was considered an authority on questions of Halacha
and rituals, and he corresponded with rabbis throughout the
German kingdom.95 In accordance with trends across northern
Europe, the Jews of Bamberg seem to have been immersed in

the money trades?pawn-broking and money lending. Docu
ments particularly attest to financial deals between Bam
berg ecclesiastics and local Jews, a circumstance that would
periodically have brought members of the community up the

cathedral hill.96

The bishop of Bamberg was obliged to see that the local
Jewish population did not disrupt the civic order. For, as was
the case across the German kingdom, the bishop of Bamberg
also was the count of the region. It was his right to levy tolls
and taxes on local trade and his charge to keep city life harmo
nious, which he did with the help of an episcopally appointed

mayor (Schulthei?).91 Frederick IPs Privilege and Judgment
in Favor of the Jews claimed authority over the Jews of the

German kingdom, but the emperor seems to have exercised
no imperial prerogative over Bamberg's community. So while
in many Rhineland cities, Jews were made to pay heavy taxes

to the imperial coffers, in Bamberg all such protection pay
ments presumably went to the bishop.98 In exchange for such
taxes, it was the bishop's obligation to defend the community,

keeping anti-Jewish violence to a minimum by closely regu

FIGURE 18. View of Bamberg's cathedral hill and valley below; Jewish
quarter at lower right. Etching from 1602 (Staatsbibliothek, Bamberg, V. B.

22) (photo: Foto Marburg /Art Resource, NY).

lating Jewish-Christian social interaction.

In this task, Ekbert and his successor Poppo had a blue
print to follow. In 1215, like most authorities in Latin Chris
tendom, Ekbert traveled to Rome for Innocent Ill's Fourth

known reasons killed in Bamberg.104 Under Bishop Ekbert and

Lateran Council. At this congress, among many other rulings,

Bishop Poppo, Jews became absorbed physically and concep

the pope and his lawyers issued decrees aimed at limiting
Jewish-Christian contact and curtailing Jewish authority over
Christians, mostly in the context of the money trades.99 One
canon sought to ensure that Christians would not be exploited

perhaps traders from Ahar (in northwest Iran), were for un

tually within the episcopally ordered city of Bamberg in a local
manifestation of the prescriptions of papal ordinances and of

Frederick IPs kingdom-wide juridical ideal.
As the clerics of Bamberg stood at the top steps of the

by Jewish moneylenders and thus would not be financially

F?rstenportal, they encountered a figure of a Jew, victimized
by the Devil. This Jew bears the trappings of earthly success,

to hold public offices.101 The canon that most affected the daily

wearing a long tunic and mantle, as well as the pointed hat
and beard identifying him unequivocally. Though he has

beholden to Jews.100 Another ruled that Jews were forbidden
lives of Jewish and Christian city dwellers alike was the one

that had influenced Frederick IPs Assizes of Messina, which
required Jews to distinguish themselves visibly from Chris
tians so as to avoid sexual contact or even marriage between
members of the two faiths.102 It was up to the Bamberg bishop
and his officers to enforce such ordinances locally.103 It seems

Bishops Ekbert and Poppo did a fair job of keeping the peace
in their domain. During their reigns only one case of local anti
Jewish violence was recorded: in 1218 two young Jewish men,

achieved worldly riches, he is spiritually bankrupt because he
has allowed himself to fall victim to devilish forces that blind
him from the truth offered by the Church.105 In his wealth, he

echoes the figure of the usurer, clutching a coin purse on the
side of the damned in the F?rstenportal tympanum. He thus also
functioned as a moralizing figure, a Dives type, personifying
Vice. He was an earthly admonishment preparing viewers for
the ultimate judgment visualized above.106 Moreover, the Jew

27
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

fingers the cord of his mantle, a gesture associated with aris
tocratic bearing. The same pose is seen in contemporary depic
tions of regal or noble figures at centers across northern France
and Germany, including the figure of the Bamberg Rider him
self.107 In this context, the gesture only underscores the folly
of the Jew who is seduced by the outward markers of status
but has none of the inner nobility to resist Satan. The bivalent

nature of the Jew came to the fore as the Bamberg clerics
compared the figures on the pillar beneath Synagoga to those

on the pillar beneath Ecclesia. On Ecclesia's pillar sits a now
headless figure, apparently an Old Testament prophet or king,
while above this figure are the symbols of the evangelists rep

resenting the Gospels (Figs. 19 and 20). An Old Testament
figure placed below the evangelist portraits alludes to Judaism's
status as the foundation, the prehistory of the Church. Thus the

figures on Ecclesia's pillar serve as a validation of the faith,
though they also attest to Judaism's obsolesence. An insistence
on Christian dominance over Jewish forebears is further artic

ulated in the F?rstenportal jambs, where apostles find their
footing on the shoulders of prophets. The stalwart Ecclesia
paired with the languid Synagoga, in their turn, present this

FIGURE 19. Seated figure and symbols of the evangelists (column beneath
Ecclesia, F?rstenportal, Bamberg Cathedral) (photo: author).

same notion in an alternative visual form. Integrated within
the larger ensemble of the F?rstenportal, Ecclesia and Syna
goga invited the clerics of Bamberg to meditate on the position
of Jews in the Christian realm in general and within their city
in particular. The Bamberg bishop lorded over a civic space
in which a Jewish population, both protected and restrained
physically and socially, was integrated within the fabric of the
city. So too up on the cathedral facade, Synagoga, included
but incapacitated physically, was integrated within a fabricated
conception of historical progress.

Triumphal Entry
As the episcopal retinue moved through the F?rsten
portal, the Church's dominance over her forerunner became
all the more visually emphatic. Ecclesia's heavy robe encircles

her body so that waist, torso, and posterior are subsumed in
a swath of fabric (Fig. 21). She is a material manifestation of
coherence and strength. From the F?rstenportal threshold the

clerics could see that Ecclesia's back is a solid block of stone,

//#

a columnlike monolith (Fig. 22). Seen while approaching the
cathedral entrance, the figure of Synagoga, on the other hand,

disintegrated. From the entryway steps, her form became the
very embodiment of lassitude (Fig. 23). Her legs are restrained

by twisted drapery, her head hangs off to the side, and she
teeters, ready to topple from her pedestal like the fallen idols
depicted in contemporary manuscripts.108 And seen from the
top step, glancing up to the right, Synagoga appeared to crash
in on herself (Fig. 24). Hip and splintered staff jut forward.
FIGURE 20. Seated figure and symbols of evangelists (column beneath
Ecclesia, F?rstenportal, Bamberg Cathedral). Photo taken from steps of
F?rstenportal (photo: author).

Synagoga's useless weapon becomes an analog for her entire
body; staff and figure alike are broken tools. Her bent arm
and the lower part of her staff further create a dramatic zigzag
pattern, and her body slouches so much that her head is hardly

28
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

p~

FIGURE 21. Ecclesia from the right, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: author).

FIGURE 23. Synagoga from the left, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: author).

FIGURE 22. Ecclesia from the extreme right, Bamberg Cathedral (photo:

FIGURE 24. Synagoga from the extreme left, Bamberg Cathedral (photo:

author).

author).

29
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

FIGURE 25. View through the F?rstenportal with the Bamberg Rider at left,

Bamberg Cathedral (photo: author).

FIGURE 26. Bamberg Rider from the rear, Bamberg Cathedral (photo:
author).

visible. Lifelike and dramatic style amplified a long-standing
artistic motif. Through form and posture Ecclesia and Syna
goga became the quintessence of Christian strength and Jewish
decrepitude.
When the members of the cathedral hierarchy entered
Bamberg Cathedral, they found themselves gazing up at the
rear end of a horse and a mounted prince, that is, the back end
of the Bamberg Rider (Figs. 25 and 26).109 The animate clerical

retinue thus became attendants of this stony monarch, who
led the bishop and his men to the interior of the church. Various
feasts at Bamberg called for ritual processions, integrating the
multiple altars that originally were set up throughout the build
ing's nave and aisles.110 The cathedral's two principal altars,
though, were in the east and west choirs. These were designated
for the canons and the bishop respectively, though other dig
nitaries, as well as a group of canons, often joined the bishop

at the west choir.111 So on many feast days, once the epis
copal retinue entered the building through the F?rstenportal,

they walked toward the cathedral's nave, moved beneath

the Bamberg Rider, and then turned west toward the Peter
schor, the episcopal choir (Fig. 28).112
Moving into the cathedral and looking up at the Rider,
the procession of clerics encountered a model Christian prince,

complete with all the features that artists across the empire
and in the French kingdom had codified as markers of ruler
ship (Fig. 27). The Rider's piercing eyes, smooth, beardless
face, chin-length wavy hair, mantle, belt, and the brooch
affixed to his collar recall the countenance and garments of
sculpted kings on the eastern portions of Reims Cathedral and
in the glass at Chartres, for example.113 The figure's grandeur
originally would have been enhanced by polychromy in tones
that complemented those painted on Ecclesia and Synagoga.
The Rider had dark brown hair and black pupils and wore a
yellow robe covered by a reddish orange mantle that seems to
have been heightened with silver-colored foil. His crown, belt,
and stirrups were gold, and his horse was painted white with
gray spots. Gold leaf adorned the harness and bridle as well.114

30
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

O 20 40m

M*l '

A. F?rstenportal

zm

B. Ecclesia

C. Synagoga

D. Bamberg Rider
E. East choir (Georgenchor)

F. Nave

G. Locations of Jews in vaults
H. West choir (Peterschor)
I. Gnadenpforte
J. Adamspforte
28. Plan ofCathe
Bamberg Cathedral (by the author with assistance from Wes Evard, 2006).
FIGURE 27. Bamberg Rider from below,FIGURE
Bamberg
dral (photo: author).

From the spot beneath this sculpted and painted king,
members of the episcopal procession gazed out on the Rider's
domain (Figs. 27-29). While all churches are conceived as
earthly reflections of the Heavenly Jerusalem, at Bamberg we
have unusually rich evidence of the now-lost polychrome and
ornamentation that manifested this metaphor visually.115 At
the time of its consecration, the walls and vaults of the Bam
berg interior were a deep pink, the ribs and other architectural

details were ivory white, the columns gray, the capitals and
consoles yellow ocher, and in the high altar at the west end,

a diaper pattern adorned the vaults and ribs (traces remain).
Colored glass in the windows and multiple tiny oil lamps hang
ing from the ceiling amplified the painted splendor of the space.
Following typical practice, the cathedral was further adorned

on high feast days. The walls were hung with tapestries, the
space was lit by ornamental lamps, and luxurious reliquaries
were displayed.116
At the margins of this celestial vision, in the vaults of the
nave, are two ghastly faces, painted on the ceiling apparently
in the early thirteenth century (Figs. 30-32).117 They hover in
the nave vaults, in the second bay from the west, one head in
the southern quadrant, the other in the eastern quadrant, each
adjacent to a vault rib. Visible to the clerical retinue both from
the nave and from the western high choir, these heads mocked
the celebrants below. Both wear a pointed cap with a large
brim extending out over his face. One is oriented frontally,
exposing fully his beastlike, half-closed, sleepy eyes and large
nose with prodigious nostrils. From his gaping mouth emerges
a dangling tongue, wagging like that of a dog. Two shaggy

FIGURE 29. Afav<? a/?d west choir, Bamberg Cathedral (photo: Foto Mar
burg / Art Resource, NY).

31
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

?Ss

/, w

i: '?-fe

FIGURE 30. Jews painted in nave vaults as seen
from west end of Bamberg Cathedral (photo:
author).

FIGURE 31. Jew in nave vault, Bamberg Cathe
dral (photo: Bayerisches Landesamt f?r Denk
malpflege).

bits of beard hanging from his chin underscore the figure's
patent brutishness. The other figure is in profile. Like his
neighbor, he has bulging, somnolent eyes and an open maw
with outstretched tongue. He also exhibits an excessively large

nose whose form echoes those of his hat brim and tongue?
three protruding members refusing to be contained. The pointed

hats, beard, and oversized proboscises accord with stereotyped
images of Jewish men seen in contemporary works created at

centers across northern Europe (for example, Fig. 33).118
Mocking and nefarious Jews were poised at the margins of
the celestial kingdom governed by the Bamberg Rider. They
threatened the divine order, but were kept at bay.

Once the bishop and his clerics settled in the stalls at
the western choir, they could look up at the Jewish figures in
the vaults and contemplate the Bamberg Rider. The Rider casts
his gaze toward the southwestern portion of the cathedral, thus
back toward the high choir, the episcopal retinue, and perhaps
a monumental crucifix once installed there along with a tomb
for Pope Clement II (d. 1047).119 Who is this ruler overseeing
the Bamberg interior? No attributes identify him explicitly as
a historical or a sacred figure.120 Identifications have ranged
from biblical heroes to saints to kings, and today many accept
the argument that he is St. Stephen of Hungary, a celebrated
saint at Bamberg.121 While some interpretive communities in
the thirteenth century and later may have understood the Bam

berg Rider to be a representation of the sainted Hungarian
king and none other, I believe that the Rider was created to
function in more general terms as a type for divinely sanc
tioned rule, rather than to depict a specific individual. As a

FIGURE 32. Jew in nave vault, Bamberg Cathe
dral (photo: Bayerisches Landesamt f?r Denk

malpflege).

type, he accommodated contemporary readings relevant to
the explicitly temporal preoccupations of Bishop Ekbert, his
successor Poppo, and their clerics, particularly the network of
legal realities and ideals surrounding Emperor Frederick II.122
While the figure is not a portrait of the Staufen ruler, I am con
vinced that the Bamberg clerics intended the Rider to refer to

both an eternal ideal and a contemporary reality.123

The common visual features and proximate installation
of the Bamberg Rider with Ecclesia and Synagoga make these

figures a coherent trio, the queenly figures on the F?rsten
portal exterior functioning as pendants to the Rider sculpture
within.124 These three sculptures are of equal scale, carved in
a common style, and originally were similarly polychromed.
As a group they echo other medieval representations of rulers

accompanied by feminized figurations of power. The Magde
burg Rider ensemble, a work contemporary with Bamberg
Cathedral, offers the most suggestive conceptual analogy
(Fig. 34).125 The Magdeburg Rider is a freestanding, monu
mental mounted ruler accompanied by two female figures,
one bearing a shield, the other a spear (apparently originally
with a banner). The group was installed on a pedestal with a
baldachin in the middle of the market square of Magdeburg
in the 1230s. Virginia Roehrig Kaufmann argues that the eques
trian figure refers to either the empire in the abstract or the
person of Frederick II in particular and that the paired female
personifications refer to the Italian and German components
of the empire.126 Formal and stylistic similarities between the

Magdeburg Rider and the Bamberg Rider as well as diplo
matic contacts between Bamberg's Bishop Ekbert and Magde

32
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

FIGURE 33. Jews mocking Christ and the Gospels, Bible moralis?e, Vi
enna, ?sterreichische National Bibliothek, MS 2554, fol. 37 (roundel a)
(photo: A. N. L. Picture Archives, Vienna).

burg's Archbishop Albrecht von K?ferberg (1205-1232) have
impelled scholars to discuss the two equestrian sculptures in
relation to one another.127 Yet the structural similarities between

the two groups?that is, the association of a mounted ruler with

paired female personifications of abstract concepts?appears
to have gone unnoticed.

FIGURE 34. Magdeburg Rider (photo: SLUB Dresden/Deutsche Fotothek).

A twelfth-century panegyrical text that builds on
centuries-old eschatological traditions strengthens the asso
ciation of Ecclesia and Synagoga with the Bamberg Rider.128
This work, a liturgical drama known as the Play of the Anti
christ (Ludus de Antichristo), features a Staufen emperor who,
as the Last World Emperor, unifies all the kingdoms of the
earth, proceeds to the Holy Land, and fights the Antichrist as
female personifications of the Church, the Synagogue, and a
third figure, pagan religion (Gentilitas), stand by.129 Scholars
long have suggested that this play or others like it may have
influenced the representations of Ecclesia and Synagoga at
Bamberg and other centers.130 But the parallels between the
personae in the play and those adorning the exterior and the
interior at Bamberg also are apparent.
It is particularly suggestive that the monastery housing
the single surviving manuscript exemplar of the complete
drama (now Munich, Staatsbibliothek, MS lat. 19411),131 the
Benedictine abbey at Tegernsee, was a foundation held by the
Andechs-Meran clan, that is, the family of bishops Ekbert
and Poppo.132 Indeed, it is possible that an Andechs-Meran
ancestor, Margarve Berthold III von Istria (d. 1188), who
possessed lands in the diocese of Bamberg and whose brother
was Bishop Otto II of Bamberg, borrowed books from the

Tegernsee library.133 The manuscript containing the Ludus
text is a 139-folio miscellany containing works on grammar,
style, epistolary forms, poetry, and letters, as well as a large

excerpt of Otto of Freising's Gesta Friderici.134 It was com
piled in the late twelfth or early thirteenth century, and the

Ludus portion (fols. 2v-7) dates to about 1178-1186. Although
there is no evidence that this manuscript traveled, it is pos
sible that it was lent out. Whatever the case, the cast of char

acters in the Play of the Antichrist suggests that female
personifications of world faiths?Christianity, Judaism, and
paganism?werzfigurae established in the lexicon of Staufen
panegyric. The circumstantial evidence linking the play to the

circle of bishops Ekbert and Poppo bolsters the suggestion
that the clerics of Bamberg conceived of Ecclesia and Syna
goga on the exterior of the F?rstenportal as pendants to the
Rider sculpture within.
The Bamberg Rider, presented with all the attributes of
an ideal ruler, seemed to halt his steed and gaze toward the
clerics as they sat in the cathedral's west choir. If the Bamberg

bishop and his retinue reflected on the current world order
as they looked at the Rider, they could draw on a wealth of

33
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

imperial panegyric to direct their meditations. Nicholas of
Bari exemplifies the prevailing rhetoric in an ode to the em
peror whom he hails as a ruler who fulfilled sacred prophe
cies, an earthly echo of Christ:
[T]he exceptional prophet King David, in his authority,

foretold of the greatness of two commanders, namely
the heavenly emperor who commands the winds and the
sea, who spoke and things were made, who ordered and
the universe was created. And ruling the earth there is
the magnificent emperor Frederick, anointed with the

joyous oil before all the kings of the world. First he
[David] prophesied the son [Christ], second [he proph
esied] Christ's successor in the empire [Frederick].135
Throughout Frederick's reign supporters cast him as mediator
between the earthly and the heavenly realms and as motor of
cosmic history, an epoch-making ruler who would usher in the

end of time and thus speed Christ's return to earth to judge
humanity.136 More specific to the theme of entry, by the thir
teenth century it was traditional that when a ruler made a cer

emonial entry into a city (adventus) he would be celebrated as
bringer of a golden age, a leader whose presence transformed
the site into a new Zion.137 Frederick II indeed had succeeded

in entering the real Jerusalem and having himself crowned
king of that city in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in
March 1229. This act echoed the long-standing prophecies
about the Last German Emperor entering the holy city and
inaugurating the end of time, prophecies that had been re
vived in texts such as the Play of the Antichrist.138 Imperial

allies embraced the notion that the emperor's successes in
the East forged an equation between the biblical ruler of
Israel, King David, and the present king of Jerusalem, Fred
erick. These encomia are all the more remarkable because
the emperor was an excommunicate at the time.139 Bishop
Ekbert, having spent months and years with the imperial court,

as well as his successor and the Bamberg clerics, would
have been well acquainted with this network of imperial ide
alizations. The Bamberg Rider may not have been created
to illustrate such notions literally. But his placement directly
inside a portal whose tympanum presents the Last Judgment,
the figure's lifelikeness, and its grandeur invited the Bamberg
clerics who looked at the Rider to consider him in relation to

such tropes.

Style and the Balance of Power
In the 1230s, to attain stability in the realm, Emperor
Frederick II established new controls over the Jews of the

German empire. Authority over Jews manifested in micro
cosm the emperor's authority over the whole of the imperial

domain. These political moves built on theological justifi
cations for the enduring presence of Jews within Christian
society. Jews were considered the Lord's original "chosen,"
keepers of the Old Testament who at the end of time might
convert to Christianity. Safeguarding them was thus part of a

divine plan. Because Jews constituted a necessary population
within the civic machinery, while taxes and municipal sur

veillance ensured their submission, bishops Ekbert and
Poppo, in the first half of the thirteenth century, succeeded in

integrating the local Jews within the social structure of Bam
berg, thereby fulfilling papal prescriptions.

At the F?rstenportal of Bamberg Cathedral, a valiant
king, a triumphant Ecclesia, and a vanquished Synagoga,
against the backdrop of a scene of divine justice, collectively
advanced a fiction of the rectitude of Jewish protection and
repression as metonym for cosmic stability. Synagoga appears
as a comely yet powerless member of the Christian retinue. In
keeping with theological notions of outward beauty as a marker
of inner spiritual merit, she is as well proportioned, serene, and

lovely as her neighbor Ecclesia. She is a constitutive, indeed
necessary, member of the City of God. Her beauty underscores
the notion that she belongs among the panoply of figures pop
ulating a divinely ordered society. Her physiological lassitude,
broken staff, and blindfold, however, brand her as a weakling

whose very repression is sanctioned under the current world
order.

Style and form were the vehicles for this message. The
"younger" workshop sculptors experimented with a new visual
mode, presenting idealized figurations in lifelike and dramatic

guises. Bodies are anatomically coherent; gestures are ex
pressive; gravity seems to weigh down drapery?all this, and
vivid polychrome, too. These visual features invited audiences
to understand the world projected in stone on the cathedral as
one in dialogue with earthly existence. Naturalistic form word
lessly insisted that dogmatic visual projections conveyed real

world truths.

The clerics at Bamberg Cathedral could view the F?rsten
portal complex and find comfort that under the current world
order, cosmic harmony would endure. At the end of time the
righteous will find their reward with Christ, and the sinful will

be enslaved to Satan. In the meantime, a divinely sanctioned
ruler administers the empire justly. Under him, cosmic oppo
sitions are brought into balance. Under him the Church stands
strong, ensuring salvation for her followers. Under him, Jews?
archetypal transgressors yet constitutive members of the Chris
tian universe?are rendered impotent and kept at the margins

of society. Remove Synagoga from this delicately balanced
constellation, and the whole edifice collapses.

34
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

NOTES
* Research for this article was funded by the Leo Baeck Foundation, the
Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst, the Memorial Foundation

8. The principal parish church in early-thirteenth-century Bamberg was the

for Jewish Culture, and Northwestern University. Thanks to Sandra
Hindman, Karl Werckmeister, and Larry Silver for guiding me through

Frau. See H. Mayer, Die Obere Pfarrkirche zu Bamberg (Bamberg,
1929); and H. Paschke, Unter unserer lieben Frauen Pfarre zu Bam
berg (Bamberg, 1967).

the dissertation from which this article draws (Northwestern University,

Evanston, IL, 2002) and especially to Joyce, Gerald, and Claudia Rowe
for their unceasing encouragement. A version of this article was pre
sented at a session in honor and memory of Jane Welch Williams at the

34th Annual Congress on Medieval Studies, Kalamazoo, MI, May 1999.
I am grateful to Barbara Abou-El-Haj for including me on the panel.
This text benefited immensely from the critiques and suggestions of
anonymous Gesta reviewers as well as many friends and colleagues.
Particular thanks are due to Robert Lerner, Mitchell Merback, Janine

Mileaf, Stephen Perkinson, Liz Spikol, Claudia Swan, and Achim
Timmermann, and also to Elizabeth Sears and Anne D. Hedeman for
editorial interest in my work and guidance. I thank Cornell Owesny for

proofing Latin translations and Wes Evard for assistance with Photo
shop. Finally, I dedicate this article to Glenn Hendler, who helped me
through multiple drafts of this text and so much more.

1. This portal was dubbed the "F?rstentor" (Princes' Portal) in the eigh
teenth century; a 1583-1584 source calls the portal the "Ehethiir"
(Portal of Honor). See R. Kroos, "Liturgische Quellen zum Bamberger

Dom," ZfKg, XXXIX/2-3 (1976), 105-146, at 110-112. This article
was reprinted in the chief monograph on the architecture of Bamberg
cathedral, D. von Winterfeld, Der Dom in Bamberg, 2 vols. (Berlin,

1979), I, 160-176 (subsequent references are to pages in ZfKg).
2. On the social makeup of Bamberg in the Middle Ages, see B. Schimmel
pfennig, Bamberg im Mittelalter: Siedelgebiete und Bev?lkerung bis

1370 (Historische Studien, CCCXCI) (L?beck, 1964), 36-39, 46-47,

and 69-82.

3. Schimmelpfennig, Bamberg im Mittelalter, 12-17; and J. Zeune, "Die
Bamberger Bischofspfalz," in Bamberg, Historisches Museum Bamberg,
Die Andechs-Meranier in Franken: Europ?isches F?rstentum im Hoch
mittelalter (Mainz, 1998), ed. U. Vorwerk and E. Schurr, 203-207.

4. On the cathedral square as the site of the Bamberg bishop's court, see
A. Erler, Das Stra?burger M?nster im Rechtsleben des Mittelalters

(Frankfurt am Main, 1954), 30-32; R. Neum?llers-Klauser, "Der
Bamberger Dom als St?tte mittelalterlicher Rechtspflege," Bericht des
Historischen Vereins Bamberg, CII (1966), 177-189; and Kroos, "Litur
gische Quellen," 112. There is also evidence that the pillar on which
Synagoga stands was used as a whipping post for the accused and con
demned. See Erler, Das Stra?burger M?nster, 31-32. On medieval build
ings and artworks as symbols of justice in general, though without direct

discussion of Bamberg, see K. Fr?lich, Mittelalterliche Bauwerke als
Rechtsdenkm?ler (T?bingen, 1939).
5. On Franciscans in Bamberg, see H. Paschke, "Das Franziskanerkloster
an der Schranne zu Bamberg," Bericht des Historichen Vereins Bam
berg, CX (1974), 169-314. On Franciscan anti-Jewish polemic, see
J. Cohen, The Friars and the Jews: The Evolution of Medieval Anti
Judaism (Ithaca, NY, 1982).

6. See the remarks of T. Breuer, "Der Bamberger Dom in seiner Stadt
und Landschaft," in Hortulus floridus bambergensis: Studien zur fr?nk

ischen Kunst- und Kulturgeschichte. Renate Baumg?rtel-Fleischmann

zum 4. Mai 2002, ed. W Taegert (Petersberg, 2004), 19-34, at 24-25.
7. For example, W. Boeck, Der Bamberger Meister (T?bingen, 1960), 12;
though see the remarks of Kroos, "Liturgische Quellen," 113-114. On
Bamberg's sainted imperial founders, see R. Klauser, "Der Heinrichs
und Kunigundenkult im mittelalterlichen Bistum Bamberg," Bericht
des Historischen Vereins Bamberg, XCV (1957), 1-208; and K. Guth,
Kaiser Heinrich II. und Kaiserin Kunigunde: Das heilige Herrscher
paar?Leben, Legende, Kult und Kunst (Petersberg, 2002).

Obere Pfarrkirche (Upper Parish Church), also known as Unsere Liebe

9. On the installation of the Bamberg Rider, see note 109 below.
10. Many now identify the Bamberg Rider with St. Stephen of Hungary.
If they are right, he is not strictly an "earthly authority." I address this

issue below.

11. This claim pertains to the situation at Bamberg as well as other con
texts across northern Europe dating from the early thirteenth century on.

Examples of the Ecclesia-Synagoga motif on cathedral facades include
the cathedrals at Reims, south facade (ca. 1220-1235) and Chartres,
north porch (destroyed) (ca. 1220); the church of Sainte-Madeleine at

Besan?on (destroyed) (ca. 1220-1230); the cathedrals at Strasbourg,
south facade (ca. 1220-1235) and Magdeburg, north facade (ca. 1250);
the Liebfraukirche at Trier, west facade (ca. 1250); the church of Saint

Seurin at Bordeaux, south facade (ca. 1270); the castle chapel at Marien
burg (Malbork), upper portal (ca. 1270-1280); the cathedrals at Minden,
western narthex (severely damaged) (ca. 1275), Freiburg im Breisgau,
west porch (ca. 1290-1295), Worms, south facade (ca. 1300) and Lincoln

Cathedral, south side (now headless) (ca. 1260-1270); the church of
Saint Peter at Wimpfen im Tal, south facade (ca. 1300); and the cathe
drals at B?ziers, west facade (fourteenth century) and Erfurt, west facade

(ca. 1335).
12. Principal studies are P. Weber, Geistliches Schauspiel und kirch
liche Kunst in ihrem Verh?ltnis erl?utert an einer Ikonographie der
Kirche und Synagoge (Stuttgart, 1894); W S. Seiferth, Synagogue and
Church in the Middle Ages: Two Symbols in Art and Literature, trans.
L. Chadeayne and P. Gottwald (New York, 1970); and Essen, Alte Syna
goge, and Saarbr?cken, Regionalgeschichtliches Museum, Ecclesia und
Synagoga: Das Judentum in der christlichen Kunst, ed. H. Jochum
(Essen, 1993). See also the more narrowly focused studies A. Raddatz,
"Die Entstehung des Motivs 'Ecclesia und Synagoge' : Geschichtliche
Hintergr?nde und Deutung" (Dissertation, Humboldt-Universit?t, Berlin,

1959); and B. Blumenkranz, "G?ographie historique d'un th?me de
l'iconographie religieuse: les repr?sentations de Synagoga en France,"

in M?langes offerts ? Ren? Crozet (Poitiers, 1966), II, 1141-1157.
Iconographie encyclopedias include A. Weis, "Ekklesia und Syna
goge," in Reallexikon zur deutschen Kunstgeschichte, ed. E. Gall and
L. H. Heydenreich (Stuttgart, 1958), IV, 1189-1215; W. Greisenegger,
"Ecclesia und Synagoge," in Lexikon der christlichen Ikonographie,
ed. E. Kirschbaum (Rome, 1968), I, 569-578; and G. Schiller, Ikono
graphie der christlichen Kunst (G?tersloh, 1976), IV, Part 1, 45-68. See
also the sources cited in note 14 below.

13. On this issue, see G. Didi-Huberman, Confronting Images: Question
ing the Ends of a Certain History of Art (University Park, PA, 2005);

H. Damisch, "Semiotics and Iconography," in The Tell-Tale Sign: A
Survey of Semiotics, ?d. T. Sebeok (Lisse, 1975), 27-36; W J. T.
Mitchell, Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology (Chicago, 1986), esp. 151
159; B. Cassidy, "Introduction: Iconography, Texts, and Audiences," in

Iconography at the Crossroads, ed. Cassidy (Princeton, 1993), 3-15;
and H. Bredekamp, "Words, Images, Ellipses," in Meaning in the Visual
Arts: Views from the Outside, ed. I. Lavin (Princeton, 1995), 363-371.

14. Recently scholars have begun to consider the physical qualities of sculp
tures of Ecclesia and Synagoga, though without direct discussion of
political contexts. See H. Sciurie, "Ecclesia und Synagoge: Bilder von

Sinnlichkeit und Gewalt am deutschen Kirchenportal des 13. Jahr
hunderts," in Blick-Wechsel: Konstruktionen von M?nnlichkeit und Weib
lichkeit in Kunst und Kunstgeschichte, ed. I. Lindner et al. (Berlin, 1989),

35
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

243-250; eadem, "Ecclesia und Synagoge an den Domen zu Stra?burg,
Bamberg, Magdeburg und Erfurt: K?rpersprachliche Wandlungen im
gestalterischen Kontext," Wiener Jahrbuch f?r Kunstgeschichte, XLVI
XLVII (1993-1994), 679-687 and 871-874; and A. Weber, "Glaube und
Wissen?Ecclesia et Synagoga," in Wissenspopularisierung: Konzepte
der Wissensverbreitung im Wandel, ed. C. Kretschmann (Berlin, 2003),

89-126. Others also have begun to examine instances of Ecclesia and
Synagoga in narrower historical, material, and iconographie contexts.
Noteworthy examples are A. Timmermann, "The Avenging Crucifix:
Some Observations on the Iconography of the Living Cross," Gesta,

XL/2 (2001), 141-160; and S. Lipton, "The Temple Is My Body:
Gender, Carnality and Synagoga in the Bible moralis?e," in Imagining

the Self, Imagining the Other: Visual Representation and Jewish
Christian Dynamics in the Middle Ages and Early Modern Period, ed.
E. Frojmovic (Leiden, 2002), 129-163. In another article I interrogate

the sculptures of Ecclesia and Synagoga at Strasbourg Cathedral in
explicitly political terms. See N. Rowe, "Idealization and Subjection at
the South Porch of Strasbourg Cathedral," in Beyond the Yellow Badge:
Anti-Judaism, Antisemitism and European Visual Culture before 1800,
ed. M. Merback (Leiden, forthcoming).
15. The principal monograph on the architecture of Bamberg Cathedral is
Winterfeld, Der Dom in Bamberg. For a general overview of the history
of the cathedral, see A. F. von Reitzenstein, Die Geschichte des Bam
berger Domes: von den Anf?ngen bis zu seiner Vollendung im 13. Jahr
hundert (Munich, 1984). An important recent study on the chronology

of the F?rstenportal is M. Schuller, Das F?rstenportal des Bamberger

Domes (Bamberg, 1993).
16. Classic discussions of the Bamberg sculpture are W. V?ge, "?ber
die Bamberger Domskulpturen," Repertorium f?r Kunstwissenschaft,

XXII (1899), 94-104, and XXIV (1901), 195-229 and 255-289; idem,
"Die Bamberger Domstatuen, ihre Aufstellung und Deutung," Zeitschrift

f?r christliche Kunst, XV (1902), 357-368 (these articles are re
printed in Bildhauer des Mittelalters: gesammelte Studien von Wilhelm

V?ge [Berlin, 1958], 130-209); H. Jantzen, Deutsche Bildhauer des
dreizehnten Jahrhunderts (Leipzig, 1925; rpt. Berlin, 2001), 72-178;
W. Pinder, Der Bamberger Dom und seine Bildwerke (Berlin, 1927);

Boeck, Der Bamberger Meister; and H. Fiedler, Magister de vivis
lapidibus: Der Meister im Bamberger Dom (Kempten im Allg?u, 1965).
A useful and accessible introduction appears in P. Williamson, Gothic
Sculpture, 1140-1300 (New Haven, 1995), 91-98. The latest findings on
both the architecture and sculpture of Bamberg are in a special edition of

Das M?nster, edited by A. Hubel and M. Schuller, "Sonderheft: Bam
berger Dom?Architektur, Skulptur, neue Glasfenster," Das M?nster:
Zeitschrift f?r christliche Kunst und Kunstwissenschaft, LVI/5 (2003).

17. See note 39 below.
18. R. Suckale, "Die Bamberger Domskulpturen: Technik, Blockbehandlung,
Ansichtigkeit und die Einbeziehung des Betrachters," M?nchner Jahr

buch der Bildenden Kunst, XXXVIII (1987), 27-82.
19. Recent scholarship that informs my own study of Bamberg Cathedral
as an image environment includes B. Abou-El-Haj, "The Urban Setting
for Late Medieval Church Building: Reims and Its Cathedral between

1210 and 1240," AH, XI/1 (1988), 17-41; W Kemp, "Kunstwissen
schaft und Rezeptions?sthetik," in Der Betrachter ist im Bild: Kunst
wissenschaft und Rezeptions?sthetik, ed. Kemp (Cologne, 1985), 7-27;
L. Spitzer, "The Cult of the Virgin and Gothic Sculpture: Evaluating

Opposition in the Chartres West Fa?ade Capital Frieze," Gesta,
XXXIII/2 (1994), 132-150; V C. Raguin, K. Brush, and P. Draper
eds., Artistic Integration in Gothic Buildings (Toronto, 1995); J. Jung,

"Beyond the Barrier: The Unifying Role of the Choir Screen in Gothic

Churches," AB, LXXXII/4 (2000), 622-657; eadem, "Peasant Meal or
Lord's Feast? The Social Iconography of the Naumburg Last Supper,"
Gesta, XLII/1 (2003), 36-61; and M. T. Davis, "Canonical Views: The

Theophilus Story and the Choir Reliefs at Notre-Dame, Paris," in Read
ing Medieval Images: The Art Historian and the Object, ed. E. Sears

and T. K. Thomas (Ann Arbor, 2002), 103-116.

20. See W. Iser, The Act of Reading: A Theory of Aesthetic Response
(Baltimore, 1978), esp. 107-134; S. Fish, "Is There a Text in This
Class?" in Is There a Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive
Communities (Cambridge, MA, 1980), 303-321; and H. R. Jauss, Toward
an Aesthetic of Reception, trans. T. Bahti (Minneapolis, 1982), passim.
Brian Stock first applied concepts from reception theory to medieval
examples, examining communal identities forged around texts?what
Stock terms "textual communities." See B. Stock, The Implications of
Literacy: Written Language and Models of Interpretation in the Eleventh
and Twelfth Centuries (Princeton, 1983); as well as idem, "Textual Com
munities: Judaism, Christianity, and the Definitional Problem," in Listen

ing for the Text: On the Uses of the Past (Baltimore, 1990), 140-158.
21. As will be discussed, Ekbert's reign is marked by a strong adherence to
the Hohenstaufen. Poppo apparently continued to support this imperial
family until 1242, when he took the side of Frederick II's enemies in
the emperor's dispute with the pope. As a result of the betrayal, Poppo
was stripped of his title as bishop of Bamberg. Between the reigns of
bishops Ekbert and Poppo there was the brief interregnum of Siegfried
von ?ttingen, which lasted one or two months. On Siegfried and Poppo,

see E. Freiherr von Guttenberg, Das Bistum Bamberg (Berlin, 1937),
170-173. On Poppo, see A. Frenken, "Poppo, Dompropst und Electus
Bambergensis: Ein untersch?tzter Protagonist Andechser Hausmacht

politik in Franken," Bericht des Historischen Vereins Bamberg,
CXXXVII (2001), 169-184.
22. That Ekbert's canons may not have always behaved loyally is sug
gested by Ekbert's ruling stating that if the deacon should fail in the
administration of corrective measures against the canons, then the bishop

may step in and exercise his authority using violence. Guttenberg, Das

Bistum Bamberg, 86. On subsequent relations between the chapter
and the bishops of Bamberg, see S. Bachmann, "Die Landst?nde des
Hochstifts Bamberg: ein Beitrag zur territorialen Verfassungsgeschichte,"

Bericht des Historischen Vereins Bamberg, XCVIII (1962), 3-320, at
34-39. See also Schimmelpfennig, Bamberg im Mittelalter, 92-93;
Guttenberg, Das Bistum Bamberg, 61-62; and R. Neum?llers-Klauser,
"Die Quellen zur Baugeschichte des Ekbert-Domes," in Winterfeld, Der

Dom in Bamberg, I, 30-37, at 33-34.
23. This restoration was carried out at the request of King Ludwig I of
Bavaria. The king's restorer, Friedrich Karl Rupprecht, kept journals
recording the work, now housed in the Archiv des Erzbistums in Bam
berg. In the early 1930s Alexander Freiherr von Reitzenstein created a
typescript of selections from these notebooks. Reitzenstein's transcrip
tions remain unpublished, but copies are housed in the Staatsbibliothek

of Bamberg and the Bayerisches Landesamt f?r Denkmalpflege in
Munich under the titles "Akten zur Geschichte des Bamberger Domes:

Restaurierung 1826/1841" (n.d., ca. 1934) and "Die Ver?nderungen
des Bamberger Domes in den Jahren 1828/44" (n.d., ca. 1934). On
Rupprecht's project, see A. Hubel, "Die beiden Restaurationen des
Bamberger Domes: zur Geschichte der Denkmalpflege im fr?hen 19.
Jahrhundert," Bericht des Historischen Vereins Bamberg, CXXI (1985),
45-90. Analysis of Reitzenstein's typescripts and further evidence on the

restoration is found in C. Hans-Schuller, Der Bamberger Dom: seine
"Restauration" unter K?nig Ludwig I. von Bayern (1826-31) (Peters

berg, 2000).
24. Schuller, Das F?rstenportal, 12.
25. In 1778 the level of the street in front of the F?rstenportal was lowered.
Its level in the thirteenth century remains unknown. See Winterfeld, Der

Dom in Bamberg, II, 13-14; and Schuller, Das F?rstenportal, 37-39.
This fact further frustrates a precise re-creation of the original viewing

36
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

experience of the F?rstenportal. For commentary on this problem, see

Suckale, "Die Bamberger Domskulpturen," 59 and 79, note 112.
26. For examination of this and related issues, see R. Nelson, "Introduction:

Descartes's Cow and Other Domestications of the Visual," in Visuality
before and beyond the Renaissance: Seeing as Others Saw, ed. Nelson
(Cambridge, 2002), 1-21; the essays in The Mind's Eye: Art and Theo
logical Argument in the Middle Ages, ed. J. Hamburger and A.-M.
Bouch? (Princeton, 2006); as well as the useful overview in C. Hahn,
"Vision," in A Companion to Medieval Art: Romanesque and Gothic in
Northern Europe, ed. C. Rudolph (Oxford, 2006), 44-64.1 am grateful
to Cynthia Hahn for sharing her text with me before publication.

27. On the history of Bamberg, see Guttenberg, Das Bistum Bamberg;
J. Kist, F?rst- und Erzbistum Bamberg: Leitfaden durch ihre Ge
schichte von 1007 bis 1960 (Bamberg, 1962); Schimmelpfennig, Bam
berg im Mittelalter; and O. Meyer et al., Oberfranken im Hochmittelalter:

Politik?Kultur?Gesellschaft (Bayreuth, 1973).
28. On Henry II's donations to Bamberg and other centers, see E. Garrison,
"The Art Policy of Emperor Henry II (1002-1024)" (Dissertation, North
western University, Evanston, IL, 2005).

29. On Bishop Ekbert, see E. Hautum, "Ekbert von Meran, Bischof von
Bamberg, 1203-1237" (Dissertation, Friedrich-Alexander-Universit?t,
Erlangen, 1924); and S. Beulertz, "Ekbert von Andechs: Bischof von
Bamberg (1203-1237)," Fr?nkische Lebensbilder, XVII (1998), 9-22.
The most up-to-date works on the Andechs-Meran clan in general are

Kloster Andechs, Haus der Bayerischen Geschichte, Herz?ge und
Heilige: das Geschlecht der Andechs-Meranier im europ?ischen
Hochmittelalter (Regensburg, 1993), ed. J. Kirmeier and E. Brockhoff;
Bamberg, Die Andechs-Meranier in Franken; and A. Frenken, "Haus
machtpolitik und Bischofsstuhl: Die Andechs-Meranier als oberfr?nk

ische Territorialherren und Bisch?fe von Bamberg," Zeitschrift f?r
bayerische Landesgeschichte, LXIII (2000), 711-786. On the twelfth
century history of the family, see J. R. Lyon, "Cooperation, Compromise

and Conflict Avoidance: Family Relationships in the House of Andechs,

ca. 1100-1204" (Dissertation, University of Notre Dame, IN, 2004).

30. On the events surrounding the wedding and their aftermath, see
Hautum, "Ekbert von Meran," 20-25; P. Groebe, "Schuld und Mit
schuld am Bamberger K?nigsmord," Fr?nkische Heimat, XVII (May
June 1938), 80-83; W Liebhart, "Der K?nigsmord von Bamberg (1208)

und Pfalzgraf Otto VIII.," in Die Witteisbacher im aichacher Land:
Gedenkschrift der Stadt Aichach und des Landkreises Aichach-Friedberg

zur 800-Jahr-Feier des Hauses Witteisbach, ed. T. Grad (Aichach,
1980), 122-127; and the incisive analysis in B. U. Hucker, "Der
K?nigsmord von 1208?Privatrache oder Staatsstreich?" in Bamberg,
Die Andechs-Meranier in Franken, 111-127.
31. For summary, see Hautum, "Ekbert von Meran," 21.

32. Hucker, "Der K?nigsmord," 118-119.
33. A. Sch?tz, "Die Andechs-Meranier in Franken und ihre Rolle in der
europ?ischen Politik des Hochmittelalters," in Bamberg, Die Andechs

Meranier in Franken, 3-54, at 32-34.

34. On the negotiations behind the acquittal, see Hautum, "Ekbert von
Meran," 25-31; and Sch?tz, "Die Andechs-Meranier," 34-36.
35. For decades scholars have dated the bulk of the rebuilding of Bamberg

Cathedral to Ekbert von Andechs-Meran's episcopacy. But recently
experts have argued that the project was advanced much earlier. For

et al., 388-391. For a review of the principal arguments on chronol
ogy, see U. Arnold, "Bemerkungen zu den Quellen der Baugeschichte
des Bamberger Domes im 13. Jahrhundert," Bericht des Historischen

Vereins Bamberg, CVI (1970), 13-20; and Winterfeld, Der Dom in
Bamberg, I, 141-145, and passim. For important commentary that lays
out key questions regarding the building's chronology, see R. Suckale,

"Nach Dethard von Winterfelds Monographie ?ber den Bamberger
Dom: zum Stand der Erforschung der Domarchitektur?mit einem

Hinweis auf die Bauweise des F?rstenportals," Bericht des His
torischen Vereins Bamberg, CXXIII (1987), 161-169.
36. A. Hubel and M. Schuller, "?berlegungen zur fr?hen Baugeschichte des
Bamberger Doms," "Sonderheft: Bamberger Dom," 310-325, esp. 321?

322; and A. Hubel, "Die ?lterere Bildhauerwerkstatt des Bamberger
Doms," ibid., 326-346. The 1225 date for the completion of the F?rsten
portal was first demonstrated in Schuller, Das F?rstenportal, 1 and 90.
37. On this fire and the later history of the building, see M. Schuller, "Eine

Brandkatastrophe und ihre sp?ten Folgen: die barocken Sanierungsar
beiten am Bamberger Dom," in Hortulus floridus bambergensis, 43-62.

38. The stylistic affinities between sculptures at Bamberg and Reims are
analyzed systematically in W. Sauerl?nder, "Reims und Bamberg: zu
Art und Umfang der ?bernahmen," ZfKg, XXXIX/2-3 (1976), 167-192;
and H.-C. Feldmann, Bamberg und Reims: Die Skulpturen, 1220-1250
(Ammersbek bei Hamburg, 1992). See also idem, "Bamberg. Bauh?tten
betriebe im Vergleich: zur Dominanz von Meistern im Bauh?ttenbetrieb

und ihre Einflu?nahme auf die Konzeption und Ausf?hrung von Skulp
turenprogrammen," in Studien zur Geschichte der europ?ischen Skulptur

im 12./13. Jahrhundert, ed. H. Beck and K. Hengevoss-D?rkop, 2 vols.
(Frankfurt, 1994), I, 87-99, and II, 24-36. Worth mention is Suckale's
insistence on the distinction between the Bamberg sculpture and con
temporary French works. See Suckale, "Die Bamberger Domskulpturen,"
esp. 39, 41, 45, 52, 53, 76 note 63 and 77 note 74.

39. Feldmann contends that the "younger" workshop arrived in Bamberg
ca. 1228 (Bamberg und Reims, 98-100); Sauerl?nder seems to suggest
they came in the 1230s ("Reims und Bamberg," 190-192); and Paul
Williamson dates the arrival to ca. 1233-1234 (Gothic Sculpture, 93-94).
For a discussion of the archaeology of the F?rstenportal, supporting
the arrival of the "younger" workshop to the 1220s, see Schuller, Das
F?rstenportal, 63-90 and 98, for discussion of the implications for the
chronology of other monuments.

40. For more on these, see notes 109 and 119 below.
41. Discussion of Frederick II draws onT.C. Van Cleve, The Emperor Fred
erick II of Hohenstaufen: Immutator Mundi (Oxford, 1972); D. Abulafia,
Frederick II: A Medieval Emperor (London, 1988); and E. Kantorowicz,
Frederick the Second, 1194-1250, trans. E. O. Lorimer (New York, 1957).

42. I am not the first to consider Ekbert's crusade as an expiatory act. J. R.

Sweeney, "Hungary in the Crusades, 1169-1218," The International
History Review, III/4 (1981), 467-481, esp. 478-479.
43. There is little information on Ekbert's activity on crusade. For scattered
references, see Hautum, "Ekbert von Meran," 35-38; R. R?hricht, Stu
dien zur Geschichte des f?nften Kreuzzuges (1891; rpt. Aalen, 1968), 84;

and Oliverus Scholasticus, Die Schriften des K?lner Domscholasters,
sp?teren Bischofs von Paderborn und Kardinal-Bischofs von S. Sabina,
ed. H. Hoogeweg (T?bingen, 1894), 162-163 and 168. On the venture,
though with little direct discussion of Ekbert, see J. M. Powell, Anatomy

of a Crusade, 1213-1221 (Philadelphia, 1986), 123-135.

dating that places the inauguration of the project in the late twelfth
century, see U. Vorwerk, "Die Andechs-Meranier und der Neubau des

44. For Ekbert's itinerary, see Neum?llers-Klauser, "Die Quellen," 36.

Bamberger Domes," in Bamberg, Die Andechs-Meranier in Franken,

45. The contract of the settlement designates the funds "ad opus et utilitatem

209-218, esp. 213-214; and A. Hubel and M. Schuller, "Der Bam
berger Dom als Erinnerungsort," in Bamberg, Haus der Bayerischen
Geschichte, Kaiser Heinrich II., 1002-1024 (Stuttgart, 2002), J. Kirmeier

ecclesie sue," suggesting that much of the new influx of cash went to

the cathedral building project. For the full passage and analysis, see
Neum?llers-Klauser, "Die Quellen," 32-33.

37
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

46. Neum?llers-Klauser argues that the linguistic construction within the
treaty (cited in note 45 above) unquestionably earmarks the funds given
by the emperor as a donation to the Bamberg Cathedral building project

(ibid., 32-33). This contention is repeated or suggested in literature
ranging from monographs to surveys. See W. R. Valentiner, The Bam
berg Rider: Studies of Medieval German Sculpture (Los Angeles, 1956),

56. An important starting point for any analysis of high medieval sculptural

styles is P. C. Claussen, "Zentrum, Peripherie, Transperipherie: ?ber
legungen zum Erfolg des gotischen Figurenportals an den Beispielen
Chartres, Sang?esa, Magdeburg, Bamberg und den Westportalen des

Domes S. Lorenzo in Genua," in Studien zur Geschichte der euro
p?ischen Skulptur, I, 665-687, and II, 424-449. See also W Sauer

105; and Williamson, Gothic Sculpture, 91. But recently Klaus van

l?nder, "Intentio vera nostra est manifestare ea, que sunt, sicut sunt:

Eickels has observed that the term opus in the document by no means
necessarily refers to the cathedral's construction. Rather, the formu
lation "ad opus" in the context of the treaty simply signifies "for the
benefit of" Bamberg Cathedral or Ekbert as representative of the insti
tution. Further, he holds that a sum of four thousand silver marks was

Bildtradition und Wirklichkeitserfahrung im Spannungsfeld der

not excessive, and indeed it was a fair compensation for damages. K. van

Eickels, "Die Andechs-Meranier und das Bistum Bamberg," in Bam
berg, Die Andechs-Meranier in Franken, 145-156, at 155 note 41.

47. Discussed in Vorwerk, "Die Andechs-Meranier und der Neubau des
Bamberger Domes," 215-216.
48. "ut hanc habeat libertatem et prerogatiuam inter cetera altar?a ut nee
prepositus nee decanus aut thesaurarius sive subcostus aut ullus illorum

qui dieuntur ecclesiastici seu campanarii unquam aliquid iuris sibi
uendicent in eo similiter et in sacerdote in illo celebrante qui ad solum

episcopum habere d?bet respectum." From A. F. von Reitzenstein,
"Die Baugeschichte des Bamberger Domes," M?nchner Jahrbuch der
bildenden Kunst, XI (1934), 113-152, at 149.
49. On the following, Hautum, "Ekbert von Meran," 41-47.

50. Ibid., 57-68.

staufischen Kunst," in Stauferzeit: Geschichte?Literatur?Kunst, ed.
R. Krohn, B. Thum, and P. Wapnewski (Stuttgart, 1978), I, 119-131
(rpt. in W Sauerl?nder, Cathedrals and Sculpture [London, 1999], I,
369-392); and K. Flasch, 'Ars imitatur naturam: Platonischer Natur
begriff und mittelalterliche Philosophie der Kunst," in Parusia: Fest
gabef?r Johannes Hirschberger, ed. Flasch (Frankfurt am Main, 1965),
265-306. An important examination of the cruel power of realistic style
is M. B. Merback, The Thief, the Cross, and the Wheel: Pain and the
Spectacle of Punishment in Medieval and Renaissance Europe (Chicago,
1999), a study that influences my own approach.

57. It must be noted that members of the so-called older workshop also
created sculptures marked by dramatic gesture and drapery, such as the
reliefs at the northwestern end of the eastern Georgenchor choir screen.

58. Walter Hartleitner has analyzed traces of the multiple layers of paint
(all in monochrome) on the F?rstenportal tympanum. It seems that
originally the tympanum was covered with a pink-colored ocher paint
with a lime-casein binder, perhaps on a thin white ground. See W Hart
leitner, "Zur Polychromie der Bamberger Domskulptur," "Sonderheft:
Bamberger Dom," 366-380, at 373-375. Hartleitner generously shared
his findings with me in two meetings, in November 1997 and June 2000.

51. Ibid., 42 and 47-57.

59. On the polychrome of Ecclesia and Synagoga, see Hartleitner, "Zur

52. In opposition to traditional literature that dubs the cathedral the "Ekbert
Dom" (see note 35 above), scholars now stress the primary role of the

chapter in the completion of the structure. See Hubel and Schuller,
"Der Bamberger Dom als Erinnerungsort"; and idem, "?berlegungen
zur fr?hen Baugeschichte," 313-314; and Frenken, "Poppo, Dompropst
und Electus Bambergensis? 176-178. For a compilation of all the docu
ments on the relation of the chapter to the cathdral, see H. Paschke,
Das Domstift zu Bamberg in seinen Bauwendungen (Studien zur Bam
berger Geschichte und Topographie, XLIV-XLVII) (Bamberg, 1972).
53. What follows is an analysis of the F?rstenportal as experienced during
a ritual entrance to the cathedral. Many ecclesiastical rituals, however,
entailed more than simple entry into the church. For instance, on feast
days, the local ecclesiastical hierarchy made processions throughout the
city of Bamberg, though the cathedral typically remained the departure

point for these peregrinations. See X. Haimerl, Das Prozessionswesen
des Bistums Bamberg im Mittelalter (Munich, 1937; rpt. Hildesheim,
1973). Furthermore, the F?rstenportal was not the only door used
for ceremonial entrances. The northeast entrance (Gnadenpforte), for
example, was used during Easter rituals. See P. W?nsche, "Die Kathe
drale als heilige Stadt: zur liturgischen Topographie des Bamberger
Doms," in Heiliger Raum: Architektur, Kunst und Liturgie im mittel
alterlichen Kathedralen und Stiftskirchen, ed. F. Kohlschein and W?n
sche (M?nster, 1998), 25-58; this article repeats some of the findings
in idem, Kathedralliturgie zwischen Tradition und Wandel: zur mittel
alterlichen Geschichte der Bamberger Domliturgie im Bereich des
Triduum Sacrum (M?nster, 1998).

54. See W?nsche, "Die Kathedrale als heilige Stadt," 27 and note 7.
55. There are no early drawings recording the original arm gestures and
attributes of Ecclesia at Bamberg, but comparison with roughly con
temporaneous monumental sculptures at Reims, Strasbourg, Magdeburg,

Trier, and other centers (see note 11 above) strongly suggests that she
carried a chalice and triumphal banner or spear.

Polychromie der Bamberger Domskulptur," 374. Hartleitner's research

supersedes assessments offered in Suckale, "Die Bamberger Dom
skulpturen," 32; and Schuller, Das F?rstenportal, 115 note 239.
60. Hartleitner, "Zur Polychromie der Bamberger Domskulptur," 373-374.
Hartleitner, though, is careful to point to the possibility that the paint
could have been added up to two decades after the creation of the
sculptures; ibid., 376-377.
61. This is a presumption that drives much recent art historical inquiry on
thirteenth-century monumental art. Exemplary studies are Abou-El-Haj,

"The Urban Setting for Late Medieval Church Building"; and W. W.
Clark, "Reading Reims, I. The Sculptures on the Chapel Buttresses,"

Gesta, XXXIX/2 (2000), 135-145.

62. For more, see G. Gebauer and C. Wulf, Mimesis: Culture?Art?Society,

trans. D. Reneau (Berkeley, 1992), 1-8; and J. D. Lyons and S. G.
Nichols, introduction to Mimesis: From Mirror to Method, Augustine to

Descartes (Hanover, NH, 1982), 1-19, esp. 1-4, as well as the essays
in that volume.

63. Discussed in R. A. Markus, Saeculum: History and Society in the
Theology of St. Augustine (Cambridge, 1970), 72-104.

64. On this development, see E. H. Kantorowicz, The King's Two Bodies:
A Study in Mediaeval Political Theology (Princeton, 1957; rpt. Princeton,

1997), 87-97.
65. Ibid., 97-143. Though see the comments of Abulafia, Frederick II: A

Medieval Emperor, 202-203.
66. "ut eorum [the Jews] quilibet super vestimenta que induet gestet lineum

uestimentum clauum undique et tinctum colore celesti et secundum
sue tempus etatis barbam nutriat et barbatus incedat, ut hec inter ortho

dosos et ipsos sit differentia generalis, per quam mutuo discernantur et
possint melius ab illicitis abstinere." Richard of San Germano, Chronica,
in Rerum italicarum scriptores, ed. L. A. Muratori (Bologna, 1938), VII,

38
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Part II, 96. For more on distinguishing marks for Jews, see note 102

below.

67. J. R. Marcus, The Jew in the Medieval World: A Source Book, 315-1791
(Philadelphia, 1938; rpt. New York, 1975), 138-139. For the Latin, N. P.

Tanner, Decrees of the Ecumenical Councils, I, Nicaea I to Lateran V
(Washington, DC, 1990), 266, Canon 68. See also note 102 below.

68. Scholars have seen this action, ultimately a rejection of the ruling
of the Fourth Lateran Council, as an affront to the papacy?that is, a
maneuver within the larger power struggle between Frederick II and
Pope Gregory IX. See S. Simonsohn, The Apostolic See and the Jews,
VII, History (Toronto, 1991), 463-464 and 464 note 4, with further
references.
69. Liber Augustalis, I, 1 and 18. See J. M. Powell, trans, and ed., The Liber
Augustalis or Constitutions ofMelfi Promulgated by the Emperor Fred
erick II for the Kingdom of Sicily in 1231 (Syracuse, NY, 1971), 7-9

and 22.

70. See, for example, Kantorowicz, Frederick the Second, 343-346; Van
Cleve, The Emperor Frederick II, 239-240; and G. Wolf, "Kaiser
Friedrich II. und die Juden: ein Beispiel f?r den Einflu? der Juden auf
die mittelalterliche Geistesgeschichte," Judentum im Mittelalter: Bei
tr?ge zum christlich-j?dischen Gespr?ch, ed. P. Wilpert (Miscellanea

Mediaevalia, IV) (Berlin, 1966), 435-441.
71. For a concise Statement on the range of approaches Frederick II took in

his treatment of Jews?as well as Muslims?see D. Abulafia, "Ethnic
Variety and Its Implications: Frederick IPs Relations with Jews and
Muslims," in Intellectual Life at the Court of Frederick II Hohenstaufen,
ed. W. Tronzo (Studies in the History of Art, XLIV) (Washington, DC,
1994), 213-224. For earlier relevant scholarship, see W Cohn-Breslau,
"Kaiser Friedrich II. und die deutschen Juden," Monatsschrift f?r Ge

schichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums, LVIII (1919), 315-332; and
J. Cohn, "Die Judenpolitik der Hohenstaufen" (Dissertation, Universit?t

schrift der Savigny-Stiftung f?r Rechtsgeschichte, CX (1993), 331-371,

at 355-366.

78. See H. Fischer, Die verfassungsrechtliche Stellung der Juden in den
deutschen St?dten w?hrend des 13. Jahrhunderts (Breslau, 1931; rpt.
Aalen, 1969), 3-7; S. Grayzel, The Church and the Jews in the XIHth
Century, rev. (New York, 1966), 348-351; Kisch, The Jews in Medieval
Germany, 133-135 and 143-153; S. W Baron, A Social and Religious
History of the Jews, IX, Under Church and Empire, 2nd ed. (New
York, 1965), 135-192; J. F. Battenberg, "Des Kaisers Kammerknechte:
Gedanken zur rechtlich-sozialen Situation der Juden in Sp?tmittelalter
und fr?her Neuzeit," Historische Zeitschrift, CCXLV/3 (1987), 545-599;
D. Willoweit, "Vom K?nigsschutz zur Kammerknechtschaft: Anmer
kungen zum Rechtsstatus der Juden im Hochmittelalter," in Geschichte

und Kultur des Judentums: eine Vorlesungsreihe an der Julius
Maximilians-Universit?t W?rzburg, ed. K. M?ller and K. Wittstadt
(W?rzburg, 1988), 71-89; Lotter, "Geltungsbereich und Wirksamkeit";
and Patschovsky, "Das Rechtsverh?ltnis."
79. This is the fundamental argument in J. A. Watt, "The Jews, the Law,

and the Church: The Concept of Jewish Serfdom in Thirteenth
Century England," in The Church and Sovereignty, c. 590-1918:
Essays in Honour of Michael Wilks, ed. D. Wood (Oxford, 1991), 153
172. The focus of Watt's article, however, is England, not Germany.

80. See Simonsohn, The Apostolic See and the Jews, 96-102; as well as
G. Dahan, Les intellectuels chr?tiens et les juifs au moyen ?ge (Paris,
1990), 9, 396, 518-519, and passim.

81. Augustine, De civitate Dei, XVI, 37; The City of God against the
Pagans, trans. R. W Dyson (Cambridge, 1998), 751-753, at 753. See
also St. Augustine, Treatises on Marriage and Other Subjects, trans.
C. T. Wilcox et al. (Fathers of the Church, XXVII) (New York, 1955),

402-405; B. Blumenkranz, "Augustin et les juifs, Augustin et le
juda?sme," Recherches augustiniennes, I (1958), 225-241, esp. 234;
idem, Die Judenpredigt Augustins: ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der

Hamburg, 1934).
72. J. Aronius, ed., with A. Dresdner and L. Lewinski, Regesten zur Ge
schichte der Juden im fr?nkischen und deutschen Reiche bis zum Jahre

1273 (Berlin, 1902; repr. Hildesheim, 1970), 206-209, Nos. 469, 472,

473, and 474.

73. For a thorough discussion of this case with further bibliography, see
G. Langmuir, "Ritual Cannibalism," in Toward a Definition of Anti
semitism (Berkeley, 1990), 263-281.
74. B. Diestelkamp, "Der Vorwurf des Ritualmordes gegen Juden vor dem
Hofgericht Kaiser Friedrichs II. im Jahr 1236," in Religi?se Devianz:
Untersuchungen zu sozialen, rechtlichen und theologischen Reaktionen
auf religi?se Abweichung im westlichen und ?stlichen Mittelalter, ed.
D. Simon (Frankfurt, 1990), 19-39.

75. MGH, Const, et acta publica (Legum Sectio IV), II, 274-276 (No. 204);
English trans. R. Chazan, ed., Church, State and Jew in the Middle Ages
(New York, 1980), 123-126; modern German translation with further

references in K. van Eickels and T Briisch, eds., Kaiser Friedrich IL:
Leben und Pers?nlichkeit in Quellen des Mittelalters (D?sseldorf, 2000),

317-321.

76. For the 1157 charter, see Chazan, Church, State and Jew, 63-66. For
a broad discussion of Jewish legal status in the empire throughout the

high Middle Ages, see G. Kisch, The Jews in Medieval Germany: A
Study of Their Legal and Social Status, 2nd ed. (New York, 1970),

129-168.

77. On this ruling, see F. Lotter, "Geltungsbereich und Wirksamkeit des
Rechts der kaiserlichen Judenprivilegien im Hochmittelalter," Asch
kenas, I (1991), 23-64, esp. 36-37; and A. Patschovsky, "Das Rechts
verh?ltnis der Juden zum deutschen K?nig (9.-14. Jahrhundert)," Zeit

j?disch-christlichen Beziehungen in den ersten Jahrhunderten (Basel,

1946; rpt. Paris, 1973), 164-175, esp. 169-171; and the commentary
on both Augustine and Blumenkranz in P. Fredriksen, "Divine Justice
and Human Freedom: Augustine on Jews and Judaism, 392-398," in
From Witness to Witchcraft: Jews and Judaism in Medieval Christian

Thought, ed. J. Cohen (Wiesbaden, 1996), 29-54.
82. R. I. Moore, Formation of a Persecuting Society: Power and Deviance
in Western Europe, 950-1250 (Oxford, 1987); idem, "Anti-Semitism and
the Birth of Europe," in Christianity and Judaism, ed. D Wood (Studies

in Church History, XXIX) (Oxford, 1992), 33-57.
83. Recent key works on the vast topic of Christian notions of Jews and
Judaism are G. Langmuir, Toward a Definition of Antis emitism (Berkeley,

1990); J. Cohen, The Friars and the Jews; idem, Living Letters of the

Law: Ideas of the Jew in Medieval Christianity (Berkeley, 1999);
idem, From Witness to Witchcraft; R. Chazan, Medieval Stereotypes
and Modern Antisemitism (Berkeley, 1997); A. S. Abulafia, Christians
and Jews: The Twelfth-Century Renaissance (New York, 1995); eadem,
ed., Religious Violence between Christians and Jews: Medieval Roots,

Modern Perspectives (Houndmills, UK, 2002); T. H. Bestul, Texts of
the Passion: Latin Devotional Literature and Medieval Society (Phila
delphia, 1996); D. Nirenberg, Communities of Violence: Persecution of
Minorities in the Middle Ages (Princeton, 1996); G. Dahan, The Chris
tian Polemic against the Jews in the Middle Ages, trans. J. Gladding
(Notre Dame, IN, 1998); M. Rubin, Gentile Tales: The Narrative Assault

on Late Medieval Jews (New Haven, 1999); M. A. Signer and J. Van
Engen, eds., Jews and Christians in Twelfth-Century Europe (Notre
Dame, IN, 2001); L. Lampert, Gender and Jewish Difference from Paul
to Shakespeare (Philadelphia, 2004); and S. F. Kruger, The Spectral Jew:
Conversion and Embodiment in Medieval Europe (Minneapolis, 2006).

39
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

84. At its highest point the tympanum only reaches 1.44 m, and the widest

point at the base is 2.9 m. See Boeck, Der Bamberger Meister, 192
note 122. For the height of Synagoga, see ibid., 197 note 258.
85. This aspect of Synagoga at Bamberg (as well as at other early-thirteenth

century sites) has been noted by generations of scholars. See, for
example, Jantzen, Deutsche Bildhauer, 150-153; and Suckale, "Die
Bamberger Domskulpturen," 56.

86. See note 100 below.

Christian representations of Jews. Noteworthy studies are B. Blumen
kranz, Juden und Judentum in der mittelalterlichen Kunst (Stuttgart,
1965); E. M. Zafran, "The Iconography of Antisemitism: A Study of

the Representation of the Jews in the Visual Arts of Europe, 1400
1600" (Dissertation, Institute of Fine Arts, New York University,
1973); W P. Eckert, '"Von Niedrigkeit umgl?nzt ihr reines Bildnis':
Antijudaismus in der christlichen Kunst; zur Darstellung von Juden und
Judentum in christlichen Kunstwerken des Mittelalters und des Barock,"
in Antisemitismus: Erscheinungsformen der Judenfeindschaft gestern

und heute, ed. G. B. Ginzel (Bielefeld, 1991), 358-388; Vienna, J?
disches Museum der Stadt Wien, Die Macht der Bilder: Antisemitische
Vorurteile und Mythen (Vienna, 1995), ed. E. Klamper; R. Mellinkoff,

Outcasts: Signs of Otherness in Northern European Art of the Late
Middle Ages, 2 vols. (Berkeley, 1993); H. Schreckenberg, The Jews in
Christian Art: An Illustrated History (New York, 1996); D. Hassig,
"The Iconography of Rejection: Jews and Other Monstrous Races," in
Image and Belief: Studies in Celebration of the Eightieth Anniversary
of the Index of Christian Art, ed. C. Hourihane (Princeton, 1999), 25
45; S. Lipton, Images of Intolerance: The Representation of Jews and

Judaism in the "Bible moralis?e" (Berkeley, 1999); D. H. Strickland
(formerly Hassig), Saracens, Demons, and Jews: Making Monsters in
Medieval Art (Princeton, 2003); M. Merback, "Fount of Mercy, City
of Blood: Cultic Anti-Judaism and the Pulkau Passion Altarpiece," AB,

LXXXVII/4 (2005), 589-642; and idem, Beyond the Yellow Badge.
Two important new publications deal with both Jewish cultural pro
duction and Christian images of Jews: E. Frojmovic, ed., Imagining the
Self, Imagining the Other: Visual Representation and Jewish-Christian
Dynamics in the Middle Ages and Early Modern Period (Leiden, 2002);
and Speyer, Historisches Museum der Pfalz Speyer, Europas Juden im
Mittelalter (Ostfildern-Ruit, 2004), ed. A Haverkamp et al., and pub
lished simultaneously in English as The Jews of Europe in the Middle
Ages (Ostfildern-Ruit, 2004), ed. A Haverkamp et al.

88. For example, Sciurie, "Ecclesia und Synagoge: Bilder von Sinnlichkeit
und Gewalt," 247-249.

89. On the Jewish quarter in relation to the topography of Bamberg in
general, see H. Paschke, Der Judenhof und die alte Judengasse zu
Bamberg (Bamberg, 1969), 3-4; and Schimmelpfennig, Bamberg im

Mittelalter, 22-23.

90. Relevant discussions of varying quality are found in A. Eckstein,
Geschichte der Juden im ehemaligen F?rstbistum Bamberg (Bamberg,
1898; rpt. Bamberg, 1985); I. Elbogen, A. Freimann, and H. Tykocinski',
eds., Germania Judaica, I, Von den ?ltesten Zeiten bis 1238 (T?bingen,
1963), 18-22; H. Friedrich-Brettinger, Die Juden in Bamberg (Bamberg,
1962), 5-8; K. Geissler, Die Juden in Deutschland und Bayern bis zur

Mitte des vierzehnten Jahrhunderts (Munich, 1976), 34; Schimmel
pfennig, Bamberg im Mittelalter, 86-87; and M. Toch, "The Formation
of a Diaspora: The Settlement of Jews in the Medieval German Reich,"

91. Aronius, Regesten, 94, No. 204.

92. Ibid., 131, No. 307.

the thirteenth century are found in ibid., 262, No. 623, and the references

in note 96 below.

94. The bathhouse is first recorded in documents from 1354 and 1361 but
may have existed earlier. See Schimmelpfennig, Bamberg im Mittelalter,

170, Table XII. In 1355 the Bamberg synagogue was converted to a
church dedicated to the Virgin and possibly rebuilt. Today it is a youth
center. See Paschke, Der Judenhof, 3-4; and R. Krautheimer, Mittelalter

liche Synagogen (Berlin, 1927), 181-186. On the history of the dance

87. The face of the Devil was heavily restored in 1881 (see Schuller, Das
F?rstenportal, 40). An ever-expanding bibliography treats medieval

Aschkenas, VII/1 (1997), 55-78.

93. Ibid., 64-65, No. 152. Other sources pertaining to Jews in Bamberg in

hall (which simply presumes its existence in the thirteenth century), see

Paschke, Der Judenhof, 15-18.
95. Elbogen, Freimann, and Tykocinski, Germania Judaica, 18-19; Eck
stein, Geschichte der Juden, 140-144; and L. Zunz, Zur Geschichte und

Literatur (Berlin, 1845), I, 34, 42-43, 101, and 193.
96. A document from 1216 tells of a Jew from Boppard who bought a plot
of land from the Bamberg church (Aronius, Regesten, 180, No. 404). A

document from 1253 reports that the Bamberg monastery of Saint
Michaelsberg had to sell land to meet the interest charged by a Jew
to whom the foundation had pawned a church vestment (ibid., 254,
No. 594). A document from 1257 again deals with Saint Michaelsberg.
This time the abbey pawned a book with a luxury binding to a Jew (ibid.,

264-265, No. 629). For similar cases, see ibid., 288-289, No. 699,
309, No. 732. Art historians have yet to explore the intimate relation
between ecclesiastical indebtedness to Jews and the profusion of church
building projects in the thirteenth century.

97. For the limits of episcopal municipal authority, see Schimmelpfennig,

Bamberg im Mittelalter, 40-41 and 83-84.
98. Extant records of Jewish taxation in Bamberg date only to the four
teenth century and later. See Friedrich-Brettinger, Die Juden in Bam
berg, 1. For classic investigations of taxation of Jews in Germany, see
I. R?sel, "Die Reichssteuern der deutschen Judengemeinden von ihren
Anf?ngen bis zur Mitte des 14. Jahrhunderts," Monatsschrift f?r Ge
schichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums, LUI (1909), 697-708; and

LIV (1910), 55-69, 206-223, 333-347, and 462-473; and O. Stobbe,
Die Juden in Deutschland w?hrend des Mittelalters in politischer,
socialer und rechtlicher Beziehung (Braunschweig, 1866; rpt. Amster

dam, 1968), 27-39.

99. For an introduction to the positions of the Fourth Lateran Council con
cerning Jews, with source texts, see Marcus, The Jew in the Medieval
World, 137-141. For all canons of the council with brief commentary,
see Tanner, Decrees of the Ecumenical Councils, 221-211.

100. Grayzel, The Church and the Jews, 306-309, No. IX; and Chazan,
Church, State, and Jew, 197-198. There is a vast bibliography on Jews
and the money trades in the high Middle Ages. For an introduction
with further sources, see Lipton, Images of Intolerance, 30-53.

101. Grayzel, The Church and the Jews, 310-311, No. XI.
102. Ibid., 308-309, No. X; L. I. Newman, "Intermarriage between Jews and
Christians during the Middle Ages," Jewish Institute Quarterly, II/2
(1926), 2-8, and II/3 (1926), 22-28; and J. A. Brundage, "Intermarriage
between Christians and Jews in Medieval Canon Law," Jewish History,

III/l (1988), 25-40. On distinguishing marks for Jews, see G. Kisch,
"The Yellow Badge in History," Historia Judaica, IV/2 (1942), 95-144;
idem, The Jews in Medieval Germany, 295-299; A. Cutler, "Innocent III
and the Distinctive Clothing of Jews and Muslims," Studies in Medi
eval Culture, III (1970), 92-116, esp. 106-112 and note 58; W. Pakter,

Medieval Canon Law and the Jews (Ebelsbach, 1988), 292-301; and
Simonsohn, The Apostolic See and the Jews, 135-138, with further
references.
103. On the proximity of the Jewish street to the cathedral, see sources in

note 89 above.

40
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

104. S. Salfeld, Das Martyrologium des N?rnberger Memorbuches (Berlin,
1898), 148; and Elbogen, Friemann, and Tykocinski, Germania Ju

daica, 18.

105. On Jews and Satan, see J. Trachtenberg, The Devil and the Jews: The
Medieval Conception of the Jew and Its Relation to Modern Antisemitism

(New Haven, 1943; rpt. Philadelphia, 1983), esp. 11-31; F. Rapha?l,
"Le juif et le diable dans la civilisation de l'occident," Social Compass,
XIX/4 (1972), 549-566; J. Y. Gregg, Devils, Women and Jews: Reflec
tions of the Other in Medieval Sermon Stories (Albany, NY, 1997); and
Strickland, Saracens, Demons, and Jews, 61-78.
106. I owe this observation to one of the anonymous reviewers of this article.

107. This gesture is made by figures at Notre-Dame and Saint-Germain
l'Auxerrois in Paris, the west choir at Naumburg, and the cathedral of
Mie?en, among other places. I owe these comparisons to W Sauerl?nder,
"Les statues royales du transept de Reims," RdA, XXVII (1975), 9-30.
On regal and noble gestures in general, see J.-C. Schmitt, La raison des
gestes dans Voccident m?di?val (Paris, 1990), 229-232; and A. Nitschke,

K?rper in Bewegung: Gesten, T?nze und R?ume im Wandel der Ge
schichte (Stuttgart, 1989), 232-239.
108. Among many possible examples is the image in a ca. 1230 Parisian
Psalter, Blackburn Museum and Art Gallery, MS 20960, fol. 3v (repro
duced in M. Camille, The Gothic Idol: Ideology and Image-Making in

Medieval Art [Cambridge, 1989], fig. 1).
109. Though some scholars argue that the Bamberg Rider originally was
installed elsewhere in the cathedral, Walter Hartleitner, following ex
tensive technical investigation, maintains that the figure today resides

in its original setting (see references in note 114 below). For a dissent
ing argument maintaining the Rider was moved to the site where it is
today only after the Middle Ages, see Suckale, "Die Bamberger Dom
skulpturen," 62. For a summary of earlier scholarship on this question,

see J. Traeger, "Der verschollene Name: zur Deutungsgeschichte des
Bamberger Reiters," Zeitschrift des deutschen Vereins f?r Kunstwissen

schaft, XLIX-L (1995-1996), 44-76, at 44-47. Further sculptures of
the Virgin, a Sibyl, St. Denis, and an angel now are installed on the
north side of the east choir. Scholars agree that few of these figures are in

the spots for which they originally were designed, and thus they remain

outside the scope of this investigation.
110. See R. Baumg?rtel-Fleischmann, Die Alt?re des Bamberger Domes von
1012 bis zur Gegenwart (Bamberg, 1987); and eadem, "Der Bamberger

Dom: die Umgestaltungen des Innenraums und die Entwicklung der
festen Ausstattung bis zum Ende des Mittelalters," in Heiliger Raum:
Architecktur, Kunst und Liturgie in mittelalterlichen Kathedralen und
Stiftskirchen, ed. F. Kohlschein and P W?nsche (M?nster, 1998), 59-99.

111. Kroos, "Liturgische Quellen zum Bamberger Dom," 115-122; and the
more developed investigation in Baumg?rtel-Fleischmann, "Der Bam
berger Dom," 93-94.
112. It is worth noting that for many feasts, altars in the nave and aisles were

chief sites for celebration of the Mass. See W?nsche, "Die Kathedrale

als heilige Stadt"; Baumg?rtel-Fleischmann, Die Alt?re; and eadem,
"Der Bamberger Dom."
113. On the chin-length wavy bob as a hairstyle specifically associated with
secular nobility, see J. Bumke, Courtly Culture: Literature and Society
in the High Middle Ages, trans. T. Dunlap (Berkeley, 1991), 149.

114. A summary of the latest findings on the Bamberg Rider is found in
A. Hubel, "Reiterfigur," in Bamberg, Kaiser Heinrich IL, 1002-1024,

ner's findings, see www.historisches-franken.de/bamreiter/reiter02.htm.
For an earlier assessment, see Suckale, "Die Bamberger Domskulpturen,"

32 and 74 note 26.

115. A new study analyzes the traces of paint left at the time of the nineteenth

century restoration of the cathedral (see note 23 above): C. Hans
Schuller, Der Bamberger Dom: seine "Restauration." See also J. Zink,
"Der Bamberger Dom und seine plastiche Ausstattung bis zur Mitte des
13. Jahrhunderts," Kunstchronik, XXVIII/11 (1975), 387-405, at 395;
and W Haas, "Die Raumfarbigkeit des Bamberger Domes," Deutsche
Kunst und Denkmalpflege, XXXVI (1978), 21-36, esp. 22-24.

116. Kroos, "Liturgische Quellen zum Bamberger Dom," 138-142. See
also F. Kohlschein, "Der Bamberger Dom als Ort f?r das 'Fest des
Glaubens,' " in Dieses gro?e Fest aus Stein: Bamberger Dom?Lesebuch
zum 750. Weihejubil?um, ed. H.-G. R?hrig (Bamberg, 1987), 285-325.
117. The faces described here are painted directly on the pink paint of the
vaults?that is, there is no trace of dirt between the ground paint layer
and the paint of the faces. Thus, it seems that these faces were painted
on the ceiling at the cathedral's construction in the 1230s. See Haas,
"Die Raumfarbigkeit," 25.

118. See references in note 87 above.
119. Pope Clement II's tomb arguably is a further component of the image
environment centered on the F?rstenportal. But because this coffin's
adornment is unrelated to the Jewish themes explored here, it remains
outside the scope of this investigation. For the latest on this tomb, see
the essays in L. G?ller, ed., Clemens IL: der Papst aus Bamberg, 24.
Dezember 1046-9. Oktober 1047 (Bamberg, 1997). On the monumental
crucifix, see J. Traeger, "Der Bamberger Reiter in neuen Sicht," ZfKg,

XXXIII/1 (1970), 1-20.

120. For a useful summary of this literature, see Traeger, "Der verschollene
Name." For more on the interpretation of this work, see L. Abramowski,
"Der Bamberger Reiter: vom Endzeitkaiser zum heiligen K?nig Stephan
von Ungarn," Zeitschrift f?r Kirchengeschichte, XCVIII/4 (1987), 206

229.

121. See Hubel, "Reiterfigur," with further references.

122. Some scholars contend that the Bamberg Rider alludes to Frederick II,
casting the emperor as a modern incarnation of Constantine or St.
George. See O. von Simson, "The Bamberg Rider," Review of Religion,

IV/3 (1940), 257-281; and G. Ladner, "Die Anf?nge des Krypto
portr?ts," in Michael Stettier zum 70. Geburtstag: von Angesicht zu
Angesicht; Portr?t Studien, ed. F. Deuchler, M. Flury-Lemberg, and

K. Otavsky (Bern, 1983), 78-97.
123. Similarities between the face of the Rider and contemporary French
representations of kings make plain the unlikelihood that the Bamberg
figure replicates the physiognomic specifics of Frederick's face. For a
related argument on monumental sculptures representing types rather
than individuals, see W. Cahn, "The Tympanum of the Portal of Saint
Anne at Notre Dame de Paris and the Iconography of the Division of
the Powers in the Early Middle Ages," JWCI, XXXII (1969), 55-72. For
recent discussions of likeness and portraiture in the premodern period,

see G. S. Wright, "The Reinvention of the Portrait Likeness in the
Fourteenth Century," Gesta, XXXIX/2 (2000), 117-134; T. Dale, "The
Individual, the Resurrected Body, and Romanesque Portraiture: The
Tomb of Rudolf von Schwaben in Merseburg," Speculum, LXXVII/3
(2002), 707-743; S. Perkinson, "Portraits and Counterfeits: Villard de
Honnecourt and Thirteenth-Century Theories of Representation," in

Bamberger Reiters," in Passau, Oberhaus Museum der Stadt Passau,
Bayern?Ungarn: Tausend Jahre (Regensburg, 2001), ed. W. Jahn,
C. Lankes, W Petz, and E. Brockhoff, 21-24; and idem, "Zur Poly

Excavating the Medieval Image: Manuscripts, Artists, Audiences;
Essays in Honor of Sandra Hindman, ed. D. S. Areford and N. A.
Rowe (Aldershot, UK, 2004), 13-35; and idem, "From 'Curious' to
Canonical: Jehan Roy de France and the Origins of the French
School," AB, LXXXVII/3 (2005), 507-532. On the question of like

chromie der Bamberger Domskulptur," 371-373. For some of Hartleit

nesses of Frederick II in particular, see H. Buschhausen, "Probleme der

402-405, No. 214. See also W Hartleitner, "Zur Polychromie des

41
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Bildniskunst am Hof Kaiser Friedrichs IL," in Stauferzeit: Geschichte?
Literatur?Kunst, ed. R. Krohn, B. Thum, and P. Wupnewski (Stutt

gart, 1978), 220-243.

Other recent investigations of the Rider complement my own,
though I depart from these scholars' definitive identifications of the
sculpture with specific figures?the former with Henry II, the latter with

the messiah as enemy of the Antichrist (as in Rev. 19:11-16): P. C.
Claussen, "Kompensation und Innovation: zur Denkmalproblematik
im 13. Jahrhundert am Beispiel der Reitermonumente in Magdeburg und

Bamberg," in Studien zur Geschichte der europ?ischen Skulptur, ed.
Beck and Hengevoss-D?rkop, I, 565-586, II, 316-331; and H. M?hring,
K?nig der K?nige: der Bamberger Reiter in neuer Interpretation (K?nig
stein im Taunus, 2004).
124. Mine is not the first study to consider the Rider in relation to other
sculptures inside and outside the cathedral. See the works cited in notes
114, 119, 120, 122, and 123 above. A recent discussion argues that the
Rider functions as witness, drawing attention to the cathedral's chief
relics, the tombs of SS. Henry and Kunigunde, by gazing at visitors

paying honor to the saints' tombs in the nave. See M. Zerbes, "Rei
terskulptur," in Passau, Bayern?Ungarn: Tausende Jahre, 47-49,

No. 1.14.

zwischen St. Georgenberg in Tirol und Tegernsee," Zeitschrift f?r
bayerische Landesgeschichte, XXXVI (1973), 16-38.
132. For discussion of the Andechs-Meran clan giving gifts to the Tegernsee

house, see A. Sch?tz, "Das Geschlecht der Andechs-Meranier im euro
p?ischen Hochmittelalter," in Kloster Andechs, Herz?ge und Heilige, 21

129, at 113-115.

133. For the letter that suggests this connection, see Die Tegernseer Brief
sammlung des 12. Jahrhunderts, ed. H. Plechl (Hannover, 2002), 321?

322, No. 290. I thank Jonathan Lyon for bringing this source to my
attention. For discussion, see Sch?tz, "Das Geschlecht der Andechs
Meranier," 117-118, with references to debate over this question.
134. The codex is relatively small (11.3 by 16 cm), on rough parchment filled
with holes (many of them sewn up), is wholly unadorned, and is filled
with abbreviations and scribal errors, some of which are corrected in a
thirteenth- or fourteenth-century hand. For a full description of the manu

script and its contents, see H. Plechl, "Die Tegernseer Handschrift Clm
19411: Beschreibung und Inhalt," Deutsches Archiv f?r Erforschung

des Mittelalters, XVIII/1 (1962), 418-501.
135. "prophetarum eximius rex David in premissa auctoritate de duobus im

125. For recent assessments with further bibliography, see V R. Kaufmann,

"Magdeburg Rider Group: State of Research and Preliminary Sugges
tions for Further Work," in Der Magdeburger Dom: ottonische Gr?n
dung und staufischer Neubau, ed. E. Ullmann (Leipzig, 1989), 205-230;
eadem, "Magdeburg Rider and the Law," in Kunst im Reich Kaiser
Friedrichs II. von Hohenstaufen, ed. K. Kappel et al. (Munich, 1996),
127-136; and eadem, "The Magdeburg Rider: An Aspect of the Re
ception of Frederick IF s Roman Revival North of the Alps," in Tronzo,

Intellectual Life at the Court of Frederick II, 63-88. I thank Virginia
Roehrig Kaufmann for sharing her work with me.

126. Kaufmann, "The Magdeburg Rider: An Aspect."
127. For example, Valentiner, The Bamberg Rider, 98-115; and Kaufmann,

"Magdeburg Rider: An Aspect," 73-75.

128. See note 138 below.
129. For the Latin text with commentary, see K. Young, The Drama of the

Medieval Church, rev. (Oxford, 1951), II, 369-396. For a thorough
discussion with transcription, see G. G?nther, Der Antichrist: der

peratoribus prophetavit, videlicet de celesti imperatore, qui ventis et mari

imperat, qui dixit et facta sunt, mandavit et creata sunt universa, et de
terrestri domino Fr[iderico] imperatore magnifico uncto oleo leticie pre
regibus universis; primo prophetavit de filio, secundario de successore

in regnum." R. M. Kloos, "Nikolaus von Bari, eine neue Quelle zur
Entwicklung der Kaiseridee unter Friedrich IL," Deutsches Archiv f?r

Erforschung des Mittelalters, XI/1 (1954), 166-190, at 169 (rpt. in
Stupor Mundi: zur Geschichte Friedrichs II. von Hohenstaufen, ed.
G. Wolf [Darmstadt, 1982], 130-159, at 134).
136. For an expansive examination of the tension between fantasy and reality
in the rule of Frederick II, see A. Sommerlechner, Stupor Mundi? Kaiser

Friedrich II. und die mittelalterliche Geschichtsschreibung (Vienna,
1999). For an overview of the stories circulated about the Staufen

(both pro and con), see K. Schreiner, "Die Staufen in Sage, Legende
und Proph?tie," in Stuttgart, W?rttembergisches Landesmuseum, Die
Zeit der Staufer: Geschichte?Kunst?Kultur (Stuttgart, 1977), III, 249
262. For useful discussions of the numinous notion of Frederick II, see

H. M. Schaller, "Die Kaiseridee Friedrichs II," in Stauferzeit: aus

staufische Ludus de Antichristo (Hamburg, 1970). For modern English

gew?hlte Aufs?tze (Hannover, 1993), 53-83; and idem, "Das Relief an
der Kanzel der Kathedrale von Bitonto: ein Denkmal der Kaiseridee

translations with commentary, see S. F. Barrow and W. H. Hulme,

Friedrichs IL," Stauferzeit, 1-23.

"Antichrist and Adam," Western Reserve University Bulletin, XXVIII/
8 (1925), 5-32; and J. Wright, ed. and trans., The Play of Antichrist

137. E. Kantorowicz, "The 'King's Advent' and the Enigmatic Panels in the

(Toronto, 1967). For a useful summary, see H. M?hring, Der Welt

Doors of Santa Sabina," AB, XXVI/1 (1944), 207-231, esp. 209-211.

kaiser der Endzeit: Entstehung, Wandel und Wirkung einer tausenj?h
rigen Weissagung (Stuttgart, 2000), 176-184. The text of the Ludus de
Antichristo likely was written by a German cleric, but not necessarily a
monk of Tegernsee (for relevance, see below), about 1160. For discus

motifs, suggesting the lexicon of forms to which the Rider-Ecclesia

sion of original authorship and description of the surviving manuscript,

see ibid., 184; as well as G?nther, Der Antichrist, 75-88.

130. Cf. Essen, Alte Synagoge, Ecclesia und Synagoga, 16. On Ecclesia,
Synagoga, and liturgical drama in general, see Weber, Geistliches
Schauspiel; and G. Lutz, "Die Darstellungen von Ecclesia und Synagoge
und das geistliche Spiel im sp?ten Mittelalter," Poznanskie Towarzystwo
Przyjaci?l Nauk, CIX (1991), 45-52, with further references.
131. A fragment of the text also survives in a twelfth-century Bible likely
created at Tegernsee, then housed at the monastery of Saint Georgen

berg in Tirol. See J. Riedmann, "Ein neuaufgefundenes Bruchst?ck
des 'Ludus de Antichristo': Beitr?ge zur Geschichte der Beziehungen

This article also offers examples of ancient and medieval images of rulers
accompanied by feminine personifications of Victory and other triumphal

Synagoga trio is related structurally.

138. On these tropes, see B. McGinn, Visions of the End: Apocalyptic Tra
ditions in the Middle Ages (New York, 1998), 82-87, 117-121, and 168
179; as related to Frederick II, see H. M. Schaller, "Endzeit-Erwartung
und Antichrist-Vorstellungen in der Politik des 13. Jahrhunderts," in
Stauferzeit, 25-52; and F. Shaw, "Friedrich II as the 'Last Emperor,' "
German History, XIX/3 (2001), 321-339.
139. The court of England, for the moment supporters of the Staufen, also pro

moted the notion that Frederick was special agent of the Lord, restoring

the Holy Land to Christianity. See the account of Frederick's crusade in
the chronicle of Roger of Wendover (d. 1236), Flores historiarum, rpt.

in Eickels and Briisch, Kaiser Friedrich IL, 173-179.

42
This content downloaded from
67.149.216.169 on Wed, 06 Jan 2021 18:13:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

